What are the characteristics of a good communication
system? Explain.

Effective communication is a message that is understood as the communicator meant it to be understood.  In order to help ensure understanding, communicators need to understand and apply the 7 Cs of Effective Communication.  An effective communication should be:
Clear—main ideas easily identified and understood
Concise—gets to the point without using unneeded words or images
Concrete—includes specific examples or explanations
Correct—in information, word choice, and grammar
Coherent—information presented in a logical sequence
Complete—enough information so the audience can understand
Courteous—polite, professional tone

Communication: Meaning, Characteristics, and Other Details (With Diagram)
Read this article to learn about the meaning, characteristics, elements, process, models, need, role, and principles of communication

Meaning of Communication:
The word communication has been derived from the Latin word ‘communis’ which means ‘common’. Thus, communication means sharing of ideas in common. “When we communicate,” says Wibur Schramn, “we are trying to establish a ‘commonness’ with someone. That is we are trying to share information, an idea or an attitude. The essence of communication is getting the receiver and the sender ‘turned’ together for a particular message.”

According to the shorter Oxford English Dictionary, communication means “the imparting, conveying or exchange of ideas, knowledge, etc., whether by speech, writing or signs.” Communication takes place when one person transfers information and understanding to another person. It refers to the exchange of ideas, feelings, emotions, knowledge and information between two or more persons.
There is a communication when you talk or listen to someone. For instance, a teacher while delivering his lecture communicates to his students. But if he speaks or writes in a language which is not understandable to his students, there is no communication. When you read a book, its author communicates to you. But communication does not mean merely written or oral messages.
It includes everything that may be used to convey meanings from one person to another, e.g., movement of lips or the wink of an eye or the wave of hands may convey more meaning than even written or spoken words. In fact, communication is the process of conveying message from one person to another so that they are understood.
In business management, ideas, objectives, orders appeals, observations, instructions, suggestions etc. have to be exchanged among the managerial personnel and their subordinates operating at different levels of the organisation for the purpose of planning and executing the business policies. The following standard definitions will further help to understand the meaning and concept of communication in management.

“Communication is the sum of all the things one person does when he wants to create understanding in the mind of another. It is a bridge of meaning. It involves a systematic and continuous process of telling, listening arid understanding.”—Louis A. Allen.
“Communication is the intercourse by word, letters or messages, intercourse of thoughts or opinions. It is the act of making one’s idea as and opinions known to others.”—Fred G. Meyer.

“Communication is the process of passing information and understanding from one person to another.”—Keith Davis.

“Communication as any behaviour that results in an exchange of meaning.”—The American Management Association.

“Communication may be broadly defined as the process of meaningful interaction among human beings. More specially, it is the process by which meanings are perceived and understandings are reached among human beings.”— D.E. McFarland.

“Communication is a way that one organisation member shares meaning and understanding with another.”—Koontz and O’Donnell.

“Simply stated, communication means the process of passing information and understanding from one person to another. Communication, fundamental and vital to all managerial functions, is the process of imparting ideas and making oneself understood by others.”—Theo Haimann.

“Communication is the broad field of human interchange of facts and opinions and not the technologies of telephone, telegraph, radio and the like.”— Charles F. Refield.

“The transfer of information from one person to another whether or not it elicits confidence. But the information transferred must be understandable to the receiver.”—C.G. Brown.
“In its everyday meaning, communication refers to the transmitting of information in the form of words, or signals or signs from a source to a receiver.”—Keith and Gubellini.

“The word communication describes the process of conveying message (fact, ideas, attitudes and opinions) from one person to another so that they are understood.”—M.W. Cummin.

In administrative context, the term communication has been defined as, “a process which involves the transmission and accurate replication of ideas ensured by feedback for the purpose of eliciting actions which will accomplish organisational goals.”—William Scott.

(A special committee on communication in business and industry) defined communication as “a mutual exchange of facts, thoughts, opinions or emotions. This requires presentation and reception, resulting in common understanding among all parts. This does not imply agreement.”—National Society for Study of Communication.
We can conclude from the above definitions that in business communication does not merely sending or receiving message. It is much more than that. It includes proper understanding of the message, its acceptance and action on it. In the broadest sense, communication refers to the whole process of man’s life in relation to the group and includes exchange of information, a system of communicating, and a process by which meanings are exchanged among human beings.

Characteristics Nature of Communication:
From the analysis of above-mentioned definitions we get the following essential features of communication:

1. It Involves at Least Two Persons:
Communication involves at least two persons, a sender and a receiver. The sender is called communicator and the receiver of the message is known as communicate. A person who speaks, writes or issues some instructions is the sender and the person for whom the communication is meant or who receives the message is the receiver or communicates.

2. Message is a Must:
A message is the subject matter of communication. e.g., the contents of the letter or speech, order, instructions or the suggestions. A communication must convey some message. If there is no message there is no communication.

3. Communication May be Written, Oral or Gestural:


Communication is generally understood as spoken or written words. But in reality, it is more than that. It includes everything that may be used to convey meanings from one person to another, e.g., movement of lips, or the wink of an eye or the wave of hands may convey more meaning than even written or spoken words.

4. Communication is a Two Way Process:
It involves both information and understanding. Communication is not complete unless the receiver has understood the message properly and his reaction or response is known to the sender. Understanding is the end result of communication but it does not imply agreement.

5. Its Primary Purpose is to Motivate a Response:
The primary purpose of communication is to motivate response or influence human behaviour. There is no doubt that motivation comes from within but communicator can also motivate people by good drafting of message, proper timing of communication, etc. To create understanding, communication should be relevant to the situation. It must always be remembered that communication is a means of motivating and not an end itself.

6. Communication may be Formal or Informal:
Formal communication follows the formal channels provided in the organisation structure. For example, the Managing Director communicates with the departmental heads, say Finance Manager, finance manager communicates to deputy finance manager, the deputy finance manager with accounts officer and so on.

In simple words, in informal communication, there is no direct communication between the Managing Director and the accounts clerks. Informal communication flows from informal channels of communication which are not provided in the organisation structure. These channels develop among members because of personal contacts through working with each other.

7. It Flows Up and Down and also from Side to Side:
Communication flows downward from a superior to subordinate and upward from subordinate to a superior. It also flows between two or more persons operating at the same level of authority.

8. It is an Integral Part of the Process of Exchange:
It refers to the exchange of ideas, feelings, emotions and knowledge and information’s between two or more persons.

Elements of Communication:
The basic elements of communication are:

1. Communicator:
The sender, speaker, issuer or writer-who intends to convey or transmit a message.

2. Communicate:
The receiver for whom the communication is meant. He receives the information, order or message.

3. Message:


The subject matter of communication i.e., the content of the letter, speech, order, information, idea or suggestion.

4. Communication Channel:
The media by which the information and understanding are passed from the sender to the receiver. It serves as link between the communicator and the communicate i.e., the levels of organisation or relationships that exist between different individuals or departments of an organisation.

5. Response or Feedback:
The effect, reply or reaction, of the information transmitted, on the communicate i.e., successful, no communication or miscommunication.

Elements of Communication

The Process of Communication:
1. The communicator first of all, formulates a clear idea about facts, opinions or information he wants to convey.

2. The idea is then translated by him into words (spoken or written), symbols or some other form of message which he expects the receiver to understand. This process is known as encoding of the message.

3. The communicator selects a suitable media for the transmission of the message, e.g., telephone, telegraph or television. The message is conveyed with the help of the media selected.

Process of Communication

4. The message is then received by the communicate. He tries to understand it by decoding the message.

5. The communicate acts upon the message as he has understood it.

6. Finally, the effectiveness of communication is measured through feedback. If the communication brings in the desired changes in the actions or behaviour of the receiver, it is said to be successful communication. In case, there is no change in the actions or behaviour, there is no communication, and if it leads to undesirable changes it is a case of miscommunication.

The process of communication is illustrated in the figures.

Models of Communication Process:
Three models have been given by different authors to explain the process of communication.
These models are explained as follows:

(i) Shannon-Weaver Model

(ii) Berlo Model

(iii) Transactional Process Model.
Need or Purpose of Communication:
The main purpose of communication is to effect change in someone i.e., to influence action or to secure inaction in the overall interest of an enterprise. It enables us to understand others and to make ourselves understood. Without communication we cannot live or work together in an organised way. It is a flux that binds people together in an organisation. The basic purpose of communication is to facilitate and lubricate the organisation. It helps management of planning effectively and controlling efficiently.

John G. Clover has outlined the following important purposes of communication:

1. To keep employees informed.

2. To provide employees with orders and instructions in connection with their duties.

3. To solicit information from employees which may aid management.

4. To make each employee interested in his respective job and in the work of the company as a whole.

5. To express management’s interest in its personnel.

6. To reduce or prevent labour turnover.

7. To instill each employee with, personal pride in being a member of the company.

Communication Roles:
Every individual working in an organisation takes part in the communication process in one way or the other. His communication role indicates the specific role he serves in an organization’s network.

Robert P. Vecchio has specified four such communication roles:

1. Gatekeeper:
A gatekeeper is a person in the communication process who passes information to others or controls messages. Common examples of gatekeepers are personal assistants and secretaries to executives. Gatekeepers should have the ability to control the information or time its release so as to influence the final decision.

2. Liaisons:
Liaisons role is performed by a person who serves as a communication link between groups, but is not a part of either group. This person serves as a bridge between groups that need to exchange messages. Liaisons can play a very effective role in organisations in linking the various departments.

3. Isolates:
An isolate is a person who has very little or no conflict with other members of the organisation. Certain jobs like night guards, chowkidars are characterised by the absence of socialization with other members of the organisation. However, there are people who remain isolates by choice. They may consciously choose not to socialise with coworkers or participate in grapevines.

4. Cosmopolites:
A cosmopolite is a person whose communication network extends far beyond the boundaries of the organisation. They have links in the external environment of the organisation. These people can serve a gate keeping role in that the organisations contact with and information from the outside world needs to be passed through them.

Essential Characteristic or Principles of an Effective Communication System:
From the above discussed steps for making effective communication, we can derive the essential characteristics of an effective communication system.

To sum up, the following principles or characteristics must be provided in an effective communication system:

1. Clarity and completeness of message.

2. Adequate briefing of the recipient.

3. Correct idea of objectives.

4. Integrity and consistency.

5. Motivation.

6. Proper feedback.

7. Proper timing.

8. Use of appropriate media.

9. Use of informal communication.

10. Principle of flexibility.

The American Management Association has given following commandments of good communication:

1. Seek to clarify your ideas before communicating.

2. Examine the purpose of each communication.

3. Consider the total physical setting whenever you communicate.

4. Consult with others, where appropriate, in planning communication.

5. Be mindful, while you communicate, of the overtones as well as basic content of your message.

6. Take the opportunity, when it arises, to convey something of help or value of the receiver.

7. Follow-up your communication.

8. Communication for tomorrow as well as today.

9. Be sure your actions support your communications.

10. Seek not only to be understood but understand.
