What do you understand by delegation of authority?Explain briefly the principles of delegation.
Imagine you and your friends are organising a Dandiya Night. In an ideal scenario, how would you go about planning the event? You’ll probably have a to-do list, complete with everyone’s responsibilities. Work will be divided and every person will be responsible for at least one task. Sharing the workload is an efficient way to speed up the planning process.

Equal distribution of work, everyone taking responsibility for their individual tasks, and efficient utilisation of resources are some of the principles of effective delegation.

Here are some of the secrets behind sharing responsibilities and delegating authority.

WHAT IS DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY?
Before we understand the principles of delegation of authority, let’s look at what ‘delegating authority’ means in the first place. Put simply, it is the process of sharing responsibilities with others and trusting them to fulfils a set of objectives.

While the duties and tasks are entrusted to the subordinates by the superior, the authority should be granted them to perform those duties and tasks well. It is called as “delegation of authority”. This delegation of authority is considered as an essential to take all actions, which lead to accomplish their duties successfully, and the organisational goals.

Delegation is the downward transfer of formal authority from one person to another. Superiors delegate authority to subordinates to facilitate the accomplishment of the assigned work.

According to Koontz and O’Donnell, “The entire process of delegation involves the determination of results expected, the assignment of tasks, the delegation of authority for accomplishment of these tasks, and the exaction of responsibility for their accomplishment.”

More often than we realise, the principles of delegation of authority regulate our everyday lives. It’s especially evident in businesses where managers and team leaders need to delegate authority quite regularly. Delegation helps spread out the workload and increases productivity because employees are motivated by individual ownership and responsibility.

Process of Delegation:
The step, which is followed when delegating authority, is the process of delegation. Normally four steps are used in the process of delegation.

Process Delegation

1. Assignment of Tasks:

The first step in this process is to determine clearly what the subordinates are supposed to do. Then the capabilities of each subordinate should be considered to match them with the assigned duties. The tasks should be distributed in such a manner that the subordinates are not unnecessarily overburdened and that each one is capable of efficiently completing the assigned task.

The total task can divided into identifiable parts so that the manager can handle some parts himself and other parts can be given to skilled subordinates. This way the coordination and supervision would become easier.

2. Delegation of Decision making Authority:

The second step is to give authority to subordinates to make and implement decisions regarding procurement of resources and supervision of activities that are relevant to the duties assigned to them. This authority must be clearly stated, and if possible in writing, so that there is no ambiguity regarding making necessary decisions.

The authority should also be related to tasks so that if the tasks change, so would the authority. Any matters or decisions that do not fall within the domain of delegated authority must be referred to the superiors.


3. Creation of Obligation:

The third step is the creation of obligation on the part of the subordinates to perform their duties satisfactorily. The person assigned the task is morally responsible to do his best since he has willingly accepted these tasks.

Obligation is a personal concern for the task. Even if the subordinate gets part of the task done through other people, he must accept responsibility for timely completion of the task as well as the quality of the output.

4. Creation of Accountability:

Being answerable to someone for your actions create accountability, an obligation to accept the consequences, good or bad. According to Newman, Summer and Warren, “by accepting an assignment, a subordinate in effect gives his superiors a promise to do his best in carrying out his duties. Having takes a job, he is morally bound to complete it. He can be held accountable for results.

PRINCIPLES OF EFFECTIVE DELEGATION
Delegation of responsibility can be very effective once you understand how to delegate properly. Here are some constructive principles of delegation in management you can follow for successful performance:

1. PRINCIPLES OF DELEGATION: FUNCTIONAL DEFINITION
When delegating authority, there should be clarity regarding the tasks to complete, the methods of operation and the expected results. Further, goals and targets should be clearly defined. For example, if the marketing team is expected to prepare two social media posts every day, the team leader should communicate and allocate responsibility to every person on the team.

2. PRINCIPLES OF DELEGATION: UNITY OF COMMAND
According to this principle, every individual should be solely accountable to someone. This gives a sense of personal responsibility because that individual is ultimately answerable to someone. Although it’s possible for someone to be accountable to multiple people, it’s best to avoid that as it can create complications and conflict. For example, if a team has two leaders, then every employee should be answerable to only one leader at any given time.

3. PRINCIPLES OF DELEGATION: ABSOLUTENESS OF RESPONSIBILITY
This principle states that a person can delegate authority but not responsibility. If a manager has delegated their authority to someone on their team, the manager can’t turn a blind eye to mishaps or hurdles later. The ultimate responsibility remains with the manager. For example, if you’ve taken some time off and your employees make some changes to an ongoing project, you should validate those changes in order to finalise them.

4. PRINCIPLES OF DELEGATION: AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY
There should be a balance between authority and responsibility. If someone is given the responsibility to carry out a task, then you should give them enough independence to carry out the task effectively. On the other hand, you shouldn’t give the person so much authority that they may abuse their positions.

5. PRINCIPLES OF DELEGATION: AUTHORITY LEVEL
Authority should always be well-defined. To avoid any overlaps, there should be a clear indication of everybody’s roles. Moreover, one can’t delegate authority unless that person is clear about the scope of their own authority. For example, if you’re responsible for shortlisting new candidates for your team, you can’t ask others to perform that task for you. Maybe they could assist you in rejecting the applications that don’t meet the minimum requirements, but that’s about it.

6. PRINCIPLES OF DELEGATION: SCALAR PRINCIPLE
The scalar principle emphasises the need for a chain of direct authority relationships throughout an organisation. It helps to understand where everyone stands in the organisation in relation to another. Knowing this also helps people quickly reach out to the right person in case of any emergencies. This principle is especially useful in places with flat organisational structures, where hierarchy isn’t very prominent.

7. PRINCIPLES OF DELEGATION: PRINCIPLE OF PROPER MOTIVATION
When you motivate someone through rewards and recognition, they’re bound to push themselves harder and perform better. This process is called ‘positive reinforcement’ in psychology. You should provide incentives so that others are motivated to take responsibility willingly. Acknowledging a person’s efforts can make a big difference.
