Elucidate the fundamental principles of TQM
During the global recession of the late ’70s and early ’80s, the United States (and the rest of the world) faced stiff competition from Japan. The Japanese had captured the world automotive and electronics markets because they found a way to produce high-quality goods at lower prices. And as a result, corporations in the U.S. looked more closely at the quality of Japanese goods and services, trying to find ways to improve production and recapture market share.

Their solution was Total Quality Management.

If your organization has just decided to incorporate TQM or if you want to see whether this process improvement methodology can help you improve production, learn more about Total Quality Management principles, plus TQM techniques that you start using now.

What is Total Quality Management?
According to the definitive text, Total Quality: A User’s Guide for Implementation, Total Quality Management (TQM) is a management technique based on the idea that all “employees continuously improve their ability to provide on-demand products and services that customers will find of particular value.”

The concept of Total Quality Management can be found right in its name: The word “total” implies that all employees in the organization, from development to production to fulfillment, are obligated to improve operations. And “management” insinuates that this methodology should be a focused effort. Leadership should provide funding, training, staffing, and clearly defined goals to actively manage product and service quality on an ongoing basis.

Fundamental principles of TQM

TQM principles can be better explained by examining those companies which have been successful. Some India companies which have won the Golden Peacock National Quality Awards from Quality Council of India (QCI) and Institute of Director (IOD) are Telco, Philips, Bharat Electronics, Kirloskar, SAIL and EIL. For this purpose, we may as well examine the Malcolm Baldrige Award winners in the USA like Motorolal the Deming Prize winners like Toyato; and the European Quality Award winners like Corning. On examining these companies, we find that the following fundamentals of TQM are common in each of these award winning international companies.

1. Putting the Customer First: Achieving customer satisfaction is at the heart of total quality management. This principle supports the traditional view that the "customer is king". If a company cannot satisfy its customers, another accompany will. Processes and products must be designed with one thing in mind-satisfying the customer. Companies in India must move from a "poduct-out" mentality (i.e., Pushing product or Service-out) to a "customer-in" attitude (i.e., providing the product or service that customers expect or better yet, beyond what they expect). These days the emphasis has shifted from the customer satisfaction to delighting the customer. The Indian companies in order to succeed in global competition are to adapt to this latest version of customer focus.

2. Management by Fact: The second principle which TQM companies world over are adopting these days is management by fact. This principles is difficult to institutionalize because every employee in an organization has opinions, views and notions about how things should be done. They may tell you what the root cause of a problem is but may not give you the facts for solving the problem. This way people may become the part of the problem itself rather than solvers. Facts are far better than opinions although opinions, views and ideas cannot be ignored.

3. Focus on Prevention: Companies like Telco, Philips, etc., which have mastered TQM realized that solving problems is the first step in making improvement. These companies realized that until methods are instituted to prevent the recurrence of problems, long-lasting results cannot be achieved. Most companies in India do not understand this fundamental principle and generally end up solving the same problem over and over again. That is they keep on inventing the wheel again and again. The companies must ensure that problems are solved once for all and recurrence of these problem is prevented.


4. Principle of Cross-functional Management: Cross-functional management recognize that no organizational unit can by itself control every aspect of the business operation to ensure that the customer's requirements are met. Cross-functional management is a method of cooperating across functional organizational boundaries-interacting with each other to make sure that the product or service meets the quality standards that are set. Indian organizations may take sometime to fully appreciate the power of this foundational principle of TQM. Because there may be a feeling that each manager in his/ her department is functioning well. Generally, there may be every person for him/herself focus. They are interested in getting their jobs done and do not bother about others. With the application of this principle and more decentralized approach, managers will be able to control the resources necessary to satisfy customers. Thus there would be improvement in customer satisfaction and cost savings. Slowly on implementation of TQM, Indian managers will understand and realize the meaning and application of cross functional management. Communication among departments will improve. Cross-functional management techniques would reduce design time, improve product and service quality and build a sense of missing among company employees. This principle is very powerful as it aligns the vectors so that everyone and everything is going in the same direction. In the absence of this principle, no other approach for TQM can be successful.


5. Principle of Employee Involvement: Surrounding the above four fundamental principles are two others that relate t how people should work together. Sometimes, this principle is referred to as respect for people. In some Indian business organizations still the workers and employees are treated as persons with brawn only and not with brain. This was the traditional way of exploiting the workers. For becoming TQM company, we have to respect and optimally use employees brain power along with their technical skills and physical power. Most employees have very good minds and can contribute creatively if recognized. The companies must start tapping employees' brainpower innovative and exciting ideas. Employees know about problem within the business much better and can help solve them. Successful TQM companies world over recognize that workers' energy, enthusiasm and value to the company can be limitless given the proper forum where their ideas can be expressed and given the proper respect for their abilities. The Indian business organizations must start applying this TQM principle for increasing their effectiveness.

6. Principle of PDCA Cycle: The plan-do-check-act (PDCA) principle is another essential tool for implementing a TQM programme successfully in Indian organizations. The PDCA also referred to as the "Deming Wheel" is the principle of continuous improvement. Most Indian companies do not have practices in place that force continuous improvement. Following the PDCA principle would force the organizations in India to examine their business processes. check is the most important step in process against a standard and stated business objective. Practice of the PDCA cycle generates numerous opportunities for further improvement. A systematic process for examining how to improve things is necessary successful application of TQM. Because conditions are never as good as they might be in any business. Managers should never be satisfied with the status quo. Becoming complacent will allow competitors to win; but by following the PDCA principle they can guard against this complacency. Thus all Indian business organizations implementing TQM must follow the principle of PDCA for their future success. Japanese companies have the PDCA principle as their main forte for improvement.

Pillars of Total Quality Management

1. Quality council.

2. Universal training on quality subjects.

3. Quality goals deployment.

4. Planned processes to meet goals.

5. Measurement feed-back and audit.

6. Recognition and reward.

Principle of TQM
1. Business success can only be achieved by understanding and fulfilling the needs of customers.

2. Leadership in quality is the responsibility of top management.

3. Statistical reasoning with factual data is the basis for problem solving and continuous improvement.

4. All functions at all levels of an organization must focus on continuous improvement to achieve corporate goals.

5. Problem solving and process improvements are best performed by multifunctional work team.

6. Continuous learning, training and education is the responsibility of everyone in the organization.

7. Strive for competitive quality.

8. Continuous for improvement of production processes establish performance measures.

9. Empowerment of people, use of teams and effective utilization of the entire work force.

10. Continuous improvement in business process quality and management.

11. Establish partnership with suppliers
