Briefly explain the various forms of organisation.
Most production and distribution activities are carried out by millions of people in different parts of the country by constituting various kinds of organisations. These organisations are based on some form of ownership. This choice affects a number of managerial and financial issues, including the amount of taxes the entrepreneur would have to pay, whether the entrepreneur may be personally sued for unpaid business bills, and whether the venture will die automatically with the demise of the entrepreneur.

The forms of business organisation are:-
1. Sole Proprietorship 2. Partnership Firm 3. Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) 4. Joint Stock Company 5. One Person Company (OPC) 6. Private Company 7. Public Limited Company 8. Company Form of Organization 9. Co-Operatives
Form # 1. Sole Proprietorship:
Sole proprietorship or individual entrepreneurship is a business concern owned and operated by one person. The sole proprietor is a person who carries on business exclusively by and for himself. He alone contributes the capital and skills and is solely responsible for the results of the enterprise. In fact sole proprietor is the supreme judge of all matters pertaining to his business subject only to the general laws of the land and to such special legislation as may affect his particular business.
Form # 2. Partnership Firm:
As a business enterprise expands beyond the capacity of a single person, a group of persons have to join hands together and supply the necessary capital and skills. Partnership firm thus grew out of the limitations of one man business. Need to arrange more capital, provide better skills and avail of specialisation led to the growth to partnership form of organisation.
According to Section 4 of the Partnership Act, 1932 partnership is “the relation between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all or anyone of them acting for all”. In other words, a partnership is an agreement among two or more persons to carry on jointly a lawful business and to share the profits arising there from. Persons who enter into such agreement are known individually as ‘partners’ and collectively as ‘firm’.
Form # 3. Limited Liability Partnership (LLP):
According to the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, an LLP is a body corporate formed and incorporated under this Act. It is a legal entity separate from that of its members.
Features:
(i) An LLP must be registered under the LLP Act 2008.
(ii) It is a body corporate having a separate entity of its own.
(iii) It has perpetual succession. Any change in its members does not affect its existence, rights and liabilities,
(iv) Any individual or a body corporate can be a partner in an LLP.
(v) Every LLP must have at least two partners.
(vi) There must be at least two designated partners and one of them must be a resident in India.
(vii) An LLP must maintain proper books of accounts as per the double entry system.
(viii) An LLP must file with the Registrar a Statement of Account and solvency along with its annual return in the prescribed form.
Form # 4. Joint Stock Company:
With the growing needs of modern business, collection of vast financial and managerial resources became necessary. Proprietorship and partnership forms of ownership failed to meet these needs due to their limitations, e.g., unlimited liability, lack of continuity and limited resources.
The company form of business organisation was evolved to overcome these limitations. Joint stock company has become the dominant form of ownership for large scale enterprises because it enables collection of vast financial and managerial resources with provision for limited liability and continuity of operations.
A joint stock company is an incorporated and voluntary association of individuals with a distinctive name, perpetual succession, limited liability and common seal, and usually having a joint capital divided into transferable shares of a fixed value.
Chief Justice John Marshall of U.S.A defined a company in the famous Dartmouth College case as “an artificial being, invisible, intangible and existing only in contemplation of law; being the mere creature of law it possesses only those properties which the charter of its creation confers upon it, either expressly or as incidental to its very existence; and the most important of which are immortality and individuality.Thus, a company is an artificial legal person having an independent legal entity.
Form # 5. One Person Company (OPC):
According to The Companies Act, 2013 of India “One Person Company is a company registered under the proposed Companies Act with just one member and shall have ‘(OPC)’ added in brackets to its name.” The Memorandum of such a company shall indicate the name of the person.
The concept of ‘one person company’ has the following characteristics:
(i) OPC may be registered as a private company with one member.
(ii) Adequate safeguards in case of death/disability of the sole owner are provided.
(iii) OPC will have a corporate entity of its own.
(iv) The owner of an OPC shall be liable only to the extent of its capital. If the activities are carried out in a mala fide manner the liability of the owner extends to his personal property.
(v) An OPC may be managed by the owner or his representative.
(vi) An OPC will get its annual accounts audited and file a copy of the same with the Registrar of Companies.
(vii) A minimum share capital may be prescribed for an OPC.
(viii) Every OPC shall have at least one director.
(ix) The one person shall have to indicate the name of the person who in the event of the subscriber’s death, disability, etc. becomes the members of the company.
Form # 6. Private Company:
Section 2 (68) of Companies Amendment Act, 2013 defines a Private Company as follows:
“private company” means a company having a minimum paid-up share capital of one lakh rupees or such higher paid-up share capital as may be prescribed, and which by its articles—
i. Restricts the right to transfer its shares;
ii. Except in case of One Person Company, limits the number of its members to two hundred-
Provided that where two or more persons hold one or more shares in a company jointly, they shall, for the purposes of this clause, be treated as a single member-
Provided further that:
a. Persons who are in the employment of the company; and
b. Persons who, having been formerly in the employment of the company, were members of the company while in that employment and have continued to be members after the employment ceased, shall not be included in the number of members; and
iii. Prohibits any invitation to the public to subscribe for any securities of the company.
Form # 7. Public Limited Company:
Public company is a separate legal entity incorporated under companies act, allowing the members to transfer their shares, while having a larger number of shareholder base.
Definition of Public Company:
u/s2 (71) of Companies Act Amendment 2013, public company means a company which:
i. Is not a private company;
ii. Has a minimum paid-up share capital of five lakh rupees or such higher paid-up capital, as may be prescribed –
Provided that a company which is a subsidiary of a company, not being a private company, shall be deemed to be public company for the purposes of this Act even where such subsidiary company continues to be a private company in its articles.
Public companies are able to attract large funding through issue of equity, debt and other forms of financing domestically as well as internationally. Due to too much legal constraints and compliances, a public company is not a very suitable form of business especially for small scale businesses and small entrepreneurs.However once a business is well established in the industry, then riding on the prestige and credibility of the business, at a later stage, a business can unravel the option of being formed as a public company.
Form # 8.Company Form of Organization:
A corporation is ‘an artificial being, invisible, intangible, and existing only in contemplation of the law’.

Advantages:
i. Limited Liability:
Because the company is a separate legal entity, it allows investors to limit their liability to the total amount of their investment in the business. This legal protection of personal assets beyond the business is of critical concern to many potential investors. In other words, corporate form of ownership does not protect its owners from being held personally liable for fraudulent or illegal acts.
ii. Continuity:
The corporate form of organization is basically continued indefinitely. The corporation’s existence does not depend on the fate of any single individual. Unlike a proprietorship or partnership in which the death of a member ends the business, a corporation lives beyond the lives of those who gave life to the organization.
iii. Ease of Ownership Transfer:
If the members in a corporation are displeased with the progress of the business, they can freely sell their shares to someone else and leave the organization. Similarly, shareholders can also transfer their shares through inheritance to a new generation of owners. During all of these transfers of ownership, the corporation continues to conduct business as usual.
iv. Ease of Raising Money:
Just because of limited liability, corporations have proved to be the most effective form of ownership for accumulating large amount of capital. Limited only by the number of shares authorized in its charter the corporation can raise money to begin business and expand as opportunity dictates by selling shares of its stock to investors.
v. Diffused Risk:
The sense of loss is spread over a large number of investors and the possibility of hardship on a few persons as in the case of partnership or on an individual as in the case of sole trade is minimized.
vi. Scope for Expansion:
Vast aggregation of capital and ploughing back of company’s own large earnings contribute to the expansion of its business. The company offers an excellent scope for self-generating growth.

Disadvantages:

i. High Legal Start-Up Costs:
To establish corporations it takes a lot of time and also cost. This is just because the owners give birth to an artificial legal entity and gestation period can be prolonged for the novice.
ii. Closely Regulated:
Corporations are subjected to more legal, reporting, and financial requirements than other forms of ownership. Corporate officers must meet more stringent requirements for recording and reporting management decisions and actions.
iii. Extensive Record Keeping:
Corporations are supposed to maintain detailed accounts for every transaction. In fact a huge establishment is needed to maintain the records and accounts and the same will be verified by independent auditors.
iv. Double Taxation:
Since a corporation is a separate legal entity, it must pay taxes on its net income at the state level, and also at local level. Before stakeholders receive a rupee of its net income and dividends, a corporation must pay these taxes at the corporate tax rate.
v. Speculation Encouraged:
The Company form of organization generally encourages reckless speculation on the stock exchange. This is an evil of great magnitude in our country.
vi. Bureaucratic Approach:
The bureaucratic habit of the company officials is to shirk troublesome initiatives because they get no direct benefit from it and often retards growth.
vii. Excessive Regulation by Law:
The state in which a company is located regulates its activities much more closely than those of non-corporate associations. A company and its management have to function well within the law.
viii. Suitability:
Company form of organization is suitable where the organization has to exist for a long period, huge capital is required, professionalism is needed, legal protection is needed, etc.

Form # 9.Co-Operatives (Common Ownership):
Co-operatives provide a structure for starting up business in which all the members of the cooperative jointly own, control, and work for the business. They share responsibility equally, make collective decisions on the basis of one person one vote and, in most co-operatives receive equal pay.The concept of a co-operative enterprise is not a political concept but the idea of co-operative working is supported by the Government. Co-operative or common ownership enterprise can be divided basically into a society or a company.
