What do you mean by valence according to vroom’s
theory?

Vroom’s Expectancy Theory of Motivation

Victor Vroom’s expectancy theory of motivation is a process theory of motivation. It says that an individual’s motivation is affected by their expectations about the future.

Specifically, Vroom says that an individual’s motivation is affected by how much they value any reward associated with an action (Valence), how much they believe that by putting effort into something they will be able to generate good results (Expectancy) and how much they believe that generating good results will result in a reward (Instrumentality).

It’s important to note that rewards could be intrinsic or extrinsic. Extrinsic motivations are external things such as money and promotion. Intrinsic motivations are internal things such as a sense of fulfillment and achievement.

          M=V*I*E

Motivation is a function of valence, instrumentality and expectancy.

What Vroom’s model means for individuals

Vroom says that an individual’s motivation is product of several factors:

Expectancy is a key part of Vroom's Expectancy Theory of Motivation
It’s not just dogs that like treats.
Valence: How much they value the potential rewards associated with the specific results or behaviors,
Expectancy: How much they believe that their additional effort will help them achieve the target results of behaviors, and
Instrumentality: How much they believe the rewards will actually appear should they achieve the desired outcomes or behaviors.
From an individual perspective this means that if any of these factors are lacking, you may lack motivation.

If, as an individual, you find yourself feeling unmotivated in the world of work, it’s worth stepping back and considering these factors. It may be that one or two of them are lacking for you. For example, you may not value the intrinsic or extrinsic rewards associated with the work you are doing. Similarly, you may simply believe that you don’t have the ability to achieve an outcome that would trigger a reward.

If you assess your motivation through the lens of Vroom’s expectancy theory, you may identify root causes for your lack of motivation. In turn, this might help identify actions you could take to restore it. As ever, you may need help from others to restore your motivation. you may benefit from discussing your thoughts with a peer, friend or even your line manager.

What Vroom’s Expectancy Theory of Motivation means for leaders and organizations

Vroom’s model helps make clear that leaders or organizations need to:

1 – Provide rewards that individuals value

These could be intrinsic aspects designed into rewarding role descriptions, they could be recognition, they could be new opportunities or they could be financial rewards. In fact, they could be a huge range of things. The important point is that you find the right rewards for your people.

2 – Set achievable objectives for individuals

The objectives you set don’t need to be easy. But they do need to be in the power of your team members to achieve. This may mean that the individuals in your teams need to be empowered to achieve things and it may mean that they need to be supported to do so. It also means that the system that you are asking them to operate within isn’t stacked against them.

3 – Provide promised rewards when they are earned

This is all about trust. To be trustworthy in this context you need to provide the implicit and explicit outcomes and rewards that you have agreed to provide. If you don’t do this, trust will be broken. When trust is broken individuals will cease to be motivated by your proposed rewards.
