Describe the classifications of Queueing models.

https://webstor.srmist.edu.in/web_assets/srm_mainsite/files/2018/Probability-Queueing-Theory-Unit-4.pdf

3. Descriptions of Four Basic Queuing Models
In this section we will describe four simple queuing models.
3.1  The M/M/s model
In this model arrivals follow a Poisson process, the service times are i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed) and follow an exponential distribution. There are s servers (s  1). In the M/M/s model there is no balking or reneging, so all arrivals eventually receive service. This model is easy to analyze, and software packages usually give exact values for the various performance measures.
3.2  The G/G/s model
This model is a generalization of the standard M/M/s model. Arrivals follow a General arrival process with i.i.d. inter-arrival times, and the service times are i.i.d. and follow a General distribution. There are s servers (s  1). There is no blocking or reneging, so all arrivals eventually receive service. This model is harder to analyze: to obtained exact values for most performance measures the analysis needs to be tailored to the specific arrival process and service time distribution. In practice, one often fits standard distributions by matching the means and standard deviations of the inter-arrival time distribution and the service time distribution. This results in approximate values for the various performance measures.
3.3  The M/M/s/N model
This model is like the M/M/s model, except that there can be no more than N customers present in the system (waiting in queue or in service) at the same time. An arriving customer who finds all N available positions occupied is blocked, i.e., this customer does not enter the system and departs without receiving service. This arrival is assumed lost to the system.
3.4  The M/M/s Impatient model
The M/M/s Impatient model is also similar to the M/M/s model, except that now each customer has a patience time. The patience time can of course differ from one customer to another, and is typically assumed to be a random variable. There are two approaches to modeling impatient customers: balking and reneging. Under the balking approach, If a customer’s wait in queue (before service starts) would be longer than the patience time,  he or she  balks, i.e., leaves without entering the system and without receiving service. Of course balking can occur only if the customer can determine upon arrival how long the wait would be. If this is not the case, the reneging approach can be used: a customer may join the queue initially, but when the wait reaches his or her patience time, the customer reneges, i.e., leaves the queue without receiving service. Hence under both approaches the set of customers that are ultimately served is the same. There is a difference in the average number of customers in the queue however: under the balking approach, customers who balk don’t spend any time in the queue, under the reneging approach, customers who renege spend their patience time in the queue. Models with impatient customers are not very common in queuing software packages, but exact values for the performance measures are fairly easy to obtain for deterministic or exponential patience times.
