Name the types of decision making environment.

Types of Decision-Making Environments

Now, let’s look at the different types of decision-making environments that you could run into. While going through each type, I’ll also be explaining its significance and how it could affect the organization.

There are three types of Decision Making Environments:

Certainty
Uncertainty
Risk
Three types of Decision-Making Environment
The Three Types of Decision-Making Environments
1. Decision-Making Under Certainty

Coming on top, we have certainty. This is often regarded as the safest decision-making environment and, consequently, the least risky. There aren’t many possibilities or paths to pursue when you’re faced with decisions in such an environment. All the data you need is readily available, or even if you need to gather it, it won’t be much expensive to get. The variables are all clear, and there are no hidden factors that could endanger your decision.

For example, consider you’re a manager and need to make a decision based on certain factors; In the case of certainty, you will have all the alternatives completely sorted out, and there won’t be much to worry about. The analysis of all the possible decisions would be done, and there would be no hidden variables. As a result, the right decision would be quite easy to distinguish from the rest.

Certainty lets you put more focus on what’s right and avoid wasting time on other alternatives. You don’t waste time thinking about different scenarios. Such scenarios are heaven for managers, and they don’t take long to get done with decisions in such environments.

2. Decision-Making Under Uncertainty

As you might have guessed, this is quite the opposite of the previous type of environment we looked at. Uncertainty is when a manager fails to get enough information needed to make a sound decision, or even if he does, it’s corrupted, biased, or has unreliable sources.

This decision-making environment is a nightmare for managers. Not only does it get very confusing about what path to follow, but when you start thinking in a certain direction, other possibilities start clouding over its authenticity and seeming more appropriate.

The variables and the data available are not credible; they keep changing and hence making the decision-maker panic. Such situations need the managers to be able to handle pressure and make the best out of any situation. A combination of a proactive approach with effective stress-management is required.

Let’s consider an example;

Consider you’re a football team coach. There are two players of your team playing on the field. By the end of the match, you need to kick one of them out. However, the problem is, both are playing at the best of their abilities, and it’s hard to separate them.

One of playing better in an instant, and the next minute, the other one exceeds him. Since their performance isn’t following a certain trend or pattern, it gets tough for you to choose which one to kick and which one to keep.

This type of decision-making environment is referred to as uncertain since a lot is going on, which leads to nothing but confusion.

3. Decision-Making Under Risk

The last type of decision-making environment is risky environments. Risk environments are when the probability of multiple events is tied to a decision. You’re never sure about the outcomes of your decision other than calculated guesses. Such decisions are associated with events that could either be very successful or quite disastrous for the organization.

When you’re faced with such problems, you will have some data available related to the situation, but it’s all a game of probabilities. The past experiences of managers play a huge role, and they often have to take a good look at their past when confronted with such decisions.

The best course of action to take in risky environments is first analyzing the risk of all the alternative actions based on the information available to you.

Once you have done the risk calculation for all the possible alternatives, choose the one with the smallest amount of risk involved.

Nowadays, almost every decision made in huge organizations is based on risk factors. This is the reason why there are whole departments dedicated to risk management. Moreover, hundreds of tools are available that help you with risk calculation if you have enough information, which makes it relatively more manageable than it would’ve been otherwise.
