State any two uses of fund flow statement

A statement of the business’s funds flow is an essential financial tool to monitor and regulate working capital. Below are some uses of Funds Flow Statement that financial analysts and managers opt for.

Analytical importance in financial operations
Even though financial statements show the resources and their utilisations, it doesn’t reveal the reasons for such changes in the Balance Sheet. The statement thus provides an analytical view of the differences between current assets and current liabilities. Hence, it also explains how these changes take place in the context of the funds of a concerned company. In some cases, even if the company runs on profit, scenarios of cash shortage may arise. In such circumstances, this statement provides a clear picture of the profit earned by an organisation.

Helps to form effective dividend policy
Sometimes a firm possesses substantial available profit to be distributed as a dividend but finds it difficult to do so due to a lack of sufficient liquidity. A Funds Flow Statement thus helps identify liquidity blockage and assists in planning an effective dividend policy.

Works as a financial guide
This statement also serves as a financial guide for a company. It brings out the financial issues that a concerned company could face in the near future. The management can thus chalk out an appropriate strategy to protect the company from any significant future financial loss.

Helps to determine the creditworthiness of an organisation
Institutions lending finances often opt to evaluate this statement for a series of years to assess the creditworthiness of an applicant company before approving a loan. Hence, it also portrays the credibility of a firm in terms of fund management.

Funds flow statement is one of the tool of management accountant. Hence, it helps many ways to the management and outsiders.
Uses, Benefits, Significance & Importance of Fund flow statement
The following are the uses, significance or benefits of funds flow statement.

1. The financial resources of the company are analysed in detail and disclose the changes made between the two balance sheet dates.
2. It gives an answer to the question of there is an inadequate liquid cash position in spite of business making more and more profits.
3. It shows the extent funds were received the ways of usage for a specific period.
4. It shows the possibility of paying more dividend than current earnings or paying normal dividend in the presence of net loss for the period.
5. The cost of capital of the business can be computed on the basis of the sources of funds flow statement.
6. It shows the usage of earned profits of the current year.
7. The sources of previous year funds flow statement may act as a guide for getting funds for future requirements.
8. Sometimes, the company has high liquid cash position even though, there is a net loss for the specific period. The reason for such position is find out through funds flow statement.
9. The application of funds can provide a basis for selection of investment proposals or future capital expenditure decisions.
10. The overall credit worthiness of the company can find out on seeing the funds flow statement.
11. The strength and weakness of financial position of the company are identified on seeing the funds flow statement.
12. It helps the management to allot the inadequate resources to meet the requirements of business at productive level.
13. It highlights the financial consequences of business operation.
14. It tests the effective use of working capital by the management during a particular period.
15. It helps the management to frame or change the financial policy of the company.
16. It suggests ways to improve working capital position of the company.
