What is gross profit?
Gross profit

Gross profit is the financial gain of a company after deduction of the costs necessary to manufacture and distribute its goods or services. These costs are referred to collectively as the cost of goods sold. The revenue of a company after it accounts for what had to be paid out to return that revenue is called the company’s gross profit, meaning it is the amount of money actually earned.
How to calculate gross profit:
Gross Profit = Total Revenue – Total Cost of Goods Sold
The general gross profit definition considers only variable costs for its deductions. These are any costs that increase or decrease the level of production output. Fixed costs not directly tied to output such as insurance and rent are not factored in gross profit.

Profit is the money that a business brings in. Comparing current profits to profits from previous accounting periods helps you understand the growth of the business.
What is gross profit?
Gross profit is the profit a business makes after subtracting all the costs that are related to manufacturing and selling its products or services. You can calculate gross profit by deducting the cost of goods sold (COGS) from your total sales.

While calculating the total sales, include all goods sold over a financial period, but exclude sales of fixed assets such as buildings or equipment.

What does gross profit tell you?
Gross profit is a measure of how efficiently an establishment uses labor and supplies for manufacturing goods or offering services to clients. It is an important figure when checking the profitability and financial performance of a business.

Gross profit helps you understand the costs needed to generate revenue. When the value of the cost of goods sold (COGS) increases, the gross profit value decreases, so you have less money to deal with your operating expenses. When the COGS value decreases, there will be an increase in profit, meaning you will have more money to spend for your business operations.
