How does management accounting differ from
financial accounting?

What is management accounting?

Management accounting, also referred to as managerial accounting, is used by managers and directors to make decisions regarding the daily operations of a company. A distinguishing feature of managerial accounting is that it is not based on past performance, but on current and future trends. For example, determining how much your business should charge for a new product and analyzing how much revenue a future product line is capable of generating are both examples of business problems within the field of managerial accounting. So, too, is deciding when to replace the computers in your offices. Since business leaders constantly need to make operational decisions in a short amount of time, management accounting must rely on predicting markets and future trends.

What is financial accounting?

Financial accounting is used to present the financial health of a company to external stakeholders. This allows the board of directors, stockholders, potential investors, creditors and financial institutions to see how the company has performed during a specific period of time in the past. These reports are filed on an annual basis. If a business is considered a publicly-traded company on the stock market, the reports must be made part of the public record. In a financial accounting course, students learn how to prepare, read and analyze financial statements.

What is the difference between the two?

There are two primary differences between financial and management accounting. The first difference is that management accounting is presented to a company’s internal community, while financial accounting is prepared for an external audience. Even though financial accounting is of great importance to current and potential investors, management accounting is necessary for managers to make current and future financial decisions for their business. The second difference is that financial accounting is exact and must adhere to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), while management accounting can be based off a guess or estimate since most managers do not have time to get exact numbers by the time a decision needs to be made
