What is meant by ‘Ratio Analysis’? What are its
limitations?

Ratio analysis is a popular technique of financial analysis. It is used to visualize and extract information from financial statements. It focuses on ratios that reflect the profitability, efficiency, financing leverage, and other vital information about a business. The ratios can be used for both horizontal analysis and vertical analysis. While they are a popular form of analysis, there are many limitations of ratio analysis that financial analysts should be aware of.

One of the key factors in ratio analysis is the comparison to the benchmark companies of an industry. This type of financial analysis can be useful to both internal management and outsider analysts of the company, as it provides significant insights from the financial statements.

As with any financial analysis technique, there are several limitations of ratio analysis. It is crucial to know these limitations to avoid misleading conclusions.
What are the limitations of ratio analysis?

Some of the most important limitations of ratio analysis include:

Historical Information: Information used in the analysis is based on real past results that are released by the company. Therefore, ratio analysis metrics do not necessarily represent future company performance.
Inflationary effects: Financial statements are released periodically and, therefore, there are time differences between each release. If inflation has occurred in between periods, then real prices are not reflected in the financial statements. Thus, the numbers across different periods are not comparable until they are adjusted for inflation.
Changes in accounting policies: If the company has changed its accounting policies and procedures, this may significantly affect financial reporting. In this case, the key financial metrics utilized in ratio analysis are altered and the financial results recorded after the change are not comparable to the results recorded prior to the change. It is up to the analyst to be up to date with changes to accounting policies. Changes made are generally found in the notes to the financial statements section.
Operational changes: A company may significantly change its operational structure, anything from their supply chain strategy to the product that they are selling. When significant operational changes occur, the comparison of financial metrics before and after the operational change may lead to misleading conclusions about the company’s performance and future prospects.
Seasonal effects: An analyst should be aware of seasonal factors that could potentially result in limitations of ratio analysis. The inability to adjust the ratio analysis to the seasonality effects may lead to false interpretations of the results from the analysis.
Manipulation of financial statements: Ratio analysis is based on information that is reported by the company in its financial statements. This information may be manipulated by the company’s management to report a better result than its actual performance. Hence, ratio analysis may not accurately reflect the true nature of the business, as the misrepresentation of information is not detected by simple analysis. It is important that an analyst is aware of these possible manipulations and always complete extensive due diligence before reaching any conclusions.

Ratio analysis involves comparing information taken from the financial statements to gain a general understanding of the results, financial position, and cash flows of a business. This analysis is a useful tool, especially for an outsider such as a credit analyst, lender, or stock analyst. These people need to create a picture of the financial results and position of a business just from its financial statements.  However, there are a number of limitations of ratio analysis to be aware of. They are:

Accounting policies. Different companies may have different policies for recording the same accounting transaction. This means that comparing the ratio results of different companies may be like comparing apples and oranges. For example, one company might use accelerated depreciation while another company uses straight-line depreciation, or one company records a sale at gross while the other company does so at net.
Business conditions. You need to place ratio analysis in the context of the general business environment. For example, 60 days of sales outstanding for receivables might be considered poor in a period of rapidly growing sales, but might be excellent during an economic contraction when customers are in severe financial condition and unable to pay their bills.
Interpretation. It can be quite difficult to ascertain the reason for the results of a ratio. For example, a current ratio of 2:1 might appear to be excellent, until you realize that the company just sold a large amount of its stock to bolster its cash position. A more detailed analysis might reveal that the current ratio will only temporarily be at that level, and will probably decline in the near future.
Company strategy. It can be dangerous to conduct a ratio analysis comparison between two firms that are pursuing different strategies. For example, one company may be following a low-cost strategy, and so is willing to accept a lower gross margin in exchange for more market share. Conversely, a company in the same industry is focusing on a high customer service strategy where its prices are higher and gross margins are higher, but it will never attain the revenue levels of the first company.
Point in time. Some ratios extract information from the balance sheet. Be aware that the information on the balance sheet is only as of the last day of the reporting period. If there was an unusual spike or decline in the account balance on the last day of the reporting period, this can impact the outcome of the ratio analysis.
In short, ratio analysis has a variety of limitations that can restrict its usefulness. However, as long as you are aware of these problems and use alternative and supplemental methods to collect and interpret information, ratio analysis is still useful.
