Sinking fund method is a method of calculating depreciation for an asset in which apart from calculating depreciation, it also keeps aside a fund for replacing the asset at the end of its useful life.

This method is used when the assets that need to be replaced are of high cost. To avoid paying for the replacement of assets at a time, companies maintain a sinking fund that will help them recover the cost of the asset while also accounting for its depreciation.

Sinking fund method is put into use by large scale industries such as utility industries that have a requirement for expensive long-term assets to function.

How Sinking Fund Functions
Sinking fund functions as an account where the company stores funds in anticipation that it will become dysfunctional after a certain point of time. Instead of expenditure that will arise at a time which can cause a significant impact on company’s profit, it is better that such an expense can be anticipated and the funds for replacement of such an asset can be made wisely.

Under the sinking fund method, the depreciation that is charged for the asset is transferred to a sinking fund account. The same amount is then invested in securities issued by the government, interest that is earned on such securities are reinvested.

The interest that is earned on the amount invested as depreciation will also be invested and will be invested to the extent of the useful life of the asset. When the asset needs replacement, the investment which is done in the form of securities are sold, and the asset will be purchased from the amount thus obtained.

Also, the old assets book value will be deposited to the Sinking fund account. The value obtained by selling off an old asset, which can be either profit or loss is then moved to the Sinking Fund Account.

The balance of the sinking fund account is then further transferred to General Reserve. The sinking fund account is also known as depreciation fund account.

Sinking Fund Formula
The formula for sinking fund is as follows.

A=(1+r/m)^n*m-1/(r/m)*P

Sinking fund formula

Where

A = Money Accumulated

P = Periodic Contribution to the sinking fund

r = Rate of Interest

n = number of years

m = number of payments per year

The periodic contribution can be calculated with the following formula

P=r/m/((1+r/m)^(n*m)-1)*A

Periodic Contribution Formula

Sinking Fund Benefits
Following are the benefits of maintaining a sinking fund:

1. It will improve the company finances: As the economic situation of a company will not be the same, the need for replacing a high value asset can be detrimental to the company’s financial position. By having a sinking fund, the company can cover those expenses, and it will keep the investors confident about the company.

2. Brings Investment: Companies with a high level of debt are deemed as risky, but a sinking fund instils confidence in the investors and can bring in further investment.

3. Lower Interest Rates: Companies with a sinking fund can get investment for low interest rates.

What Is the Sinking Fund Method?
The sinking fund method is a technique for depreciating an asset while generating enough money to replace it at the end of its useful life.


As depreciation charges are incurred to reflect the asset's falling value, a matching amount of cash is invested. These funds sit in a sinking fund account and generate interest.


KEY TAKEAWAYS
The sinking fund method is a depreciation technique used to finance the replacement of an asset at the end of its useful life.
As depreciation is incurred, a matching amount of cash is invested, usually in government-backed securities.
Companies rarely use the sinking fund method of depreciation because of its complexity.
Companies may use the sinking fund method of depreciation for real estate assets, though different scenarios may apply to real estate.
Understanding the Sinking Fund Method
Companies use depreciation to expense an asset over time, not just in the period that it was purchased. In other words, depreciation involves stretching out the cost of assets over many different accounting periods, enabling companies to benefit from them without deducting the full cost from net income (NI).

One of the biggest challenges of depreciation is determining how much to expense. For companies that want to put money aside to purchase a replacement asset upon the full depreciation of the old one, the sinking fund method may be a viable option.

Under this method, the amount of money added to the asset-replacement fund each year is calculated by determining the cost to replace the asset, how many years the asset is expected to last, and the expected rate of return on the investment, as well as potential earnings from the effects of compounding interest.

In most cases, sinking funds invest in government-backed securities, such as Treasury notes, bills, and bonds. Investments matching the duration of the asset's life are usually used, but shorter-term investments can be reinvested. The asset's depreciation schedule determines the investment amounts.


The sinking fund method is mainly used by large-scale industries, such as utility companies, that require expensive, long-term assets to function.

Additionally, companies may also use the sinking fund method of depreciation for real estate assets. Different scenarios may apply to real estate assets, but one of the most common is depreciation for lease renewals. In this situation, a depreciation schedule is based on the lease term and expected interest.

Special Considerations
Most companies rarely use the sinking fund method, preferring instead to employ the simpler straight-line or declining balance depreciation techniques.

The sinking fund method is seen as complex, particularly as it requires the use of a separate replacement fund for each asset. Moreover, companies recognize that the cost of replacing an old asset can change over time and are also mindful that it is difficult to put enough cash aside when interest rates are unpredictable and consistently fluctuate.

 When interest rates cannot reasonably be predicted, the sinking fund method is generally undesirable.
In addition to the added complexities of the sinking fund method, there are other reasons why this method is not suitable. For example, some companies prefer to invest capital resources in other areas with more promising returns.

While the sinking fund provides for the purchase of a new asset at the end of the former's useful life, some firms prefer to instead use their working capital for this purchase. Also, companies wanting to keep their depreciation expenses low find this method unfavorable.
