Explain the factors influencing the group cohesiveness.
This article throws light on the twelve major factors influencing group cohesiveness, i.e, (1) Similarities of Attitudes and Values, (2) Size of the Group, (3) Time, (4) Location, (5) Status, (6) Difficulty in Entry, (7) Inter Dependency, (8) Management Behaviour, (9) Member Turnover, (10) Threat, (11) Previous Successes and Shared Goals, and (12) Cooperation.
1. Similarities of Attitudes and Values:
One of the strongest sources of group cohesiveness is the similarity in attitudes and values among group members. We enjoy the company of people who hold similar opinions, morals, beliefs and code of conduct, because the person who shares the same opinions as we do provide us with a kind of social validation for our beliefs. He provides us with a feeling that we are right. If someone disagrees with us, this might make us scared that we are wrong.
Similarity of interest is very important when the group’s primary goal is that of creating a friendly interpersonal climate. This factor may not be so important when the goal is task oriented. For example, if the army has to win a strategic battle, then the task accomplishment becomes the cohesive factor rather than the similarity of attitudes and values because the unit may consist of soldiers from different parts of the country who may not have much in common.
2. Size of the Group:
Small groups are effective. The larger the size of the group, the less cohesive the group is.
The main reasons for this are as explained below:
(i) When the group is small, its members have constant face to face contacts. Thus, there will be high degree of interaction and communication with each other. In large groups, the possibility of interaction among members is less.
(ii) As group size increases, it becomes more difficult to get the group to agree on common goals and activities and expression of disagreement and dissatisfaction increases.
(iii) Another problem with large size groups is that there is a likelihood of forming small groups within the large groups. This would result in the dilution of the common group goal thus increasing the extent of power politics play. This tends to decrease the overall cohesiveness.
(iv) Studies have shown that if all the members of the group are of the same sex, then small groups have better cohesion than large ones. But when the groups were made up of both males and females, the large groups have better cohesion.
3. Time:
It is quite natural that the more time people spend with one another, the more they will get to know each other and more tendency there will be to get closer to each other, thus, strengthening the degree of cohesiveness. In a workplace, people who work near each other are more likely to spend more time together. In routine life, you will spend more time with only those whom you like personally and want to continue interacting with them.
4. Location:
Location of the group plays an important role in determining the cohesiveness. Where members of a group are located close together separated from other groups, they will develop greater cohesiveness because of constant face to face interaction. Where there is no dividing line between one group and another, cohesion is more difficult to achieve because a chain of interactions develops.
5. Status:
Status of a group determines the degree of group cohesiveness to a great extent. A high status group receives greater loyalty from its members which in turn makes the group more strong. That is why people are generally more loyal to high status groups.
6. Difficulty in Entry:
The more difficult it is to get in a group, the more cohesive that group becomes. The reasons is that in exclusive and elite groups the members are selected on the basis of certain characteristics and these characteristics being common to all add to the degree of liking and attraction towards each other. The more exclusive the group the more is the closeness among members. As the groups are not easy to join, the selected members feel a sense of pride and accomplishment.
7. Inter Dependency:
When each member of a group has independent activities, the cohesiveness among the members of such group will be less as compared to the group whose members are doing the operations which are dependent upon each other, thus, mutual dependency leads to greater cohesiveness.
8. Management Behaviour:
The behaviour of management has a direct influence on the degree of cohesiveness that exists within a group. The manager can make close relations difficult by creating unhealthy competition among employees. On the other hand, he can build solidarity by rewarding cooperative behaviour. The cohesive group can help attain the group goals more effectively, if the group members are properly inspired by the manager.
9. Member Turnover:
To make a group more cohesive, there is need for some degree of stable relationships among members. The higher the degree of member turnover, the less cohesive a group becomes, because the more frequently members leave a particular group the more time a new member takes to get attached to the group and the more time the old member takes to get attached to the new group.
10. Threat:
Threat is a very powerful force which unifies the group, particularly when it come from:
(i) Outside the group
(ii) Cooperation can help over-some the threat and
(iii) There is little or no chance for escape.
For example, the management threats frequently bring together an otherwise disarrayed union. Thus, the threatening party will have a less chance of success when faced with a unified force.
11. Previous Successes and Shared Goals:
When a group achieves a meaningful goal, the cohesiveness of the group increases because the success is shared by all the members and each one feels responsible for the achievement. , If the group agrees on the purpose and direction of its activities, this serves to bind the group together. For this reason, successful companies find it easy to hire new talented employees.
12. Cooperation:
Sometimes the general atmosphere of group enhances cohesiveness. The overall atmosphere depends among other things on leadership.
