Key elements of Organizational Behavior – People, Structure ,Technology & External Environment | Organizational Behavior
In this world, every substance has certain elements. Likewise, Organizational Behavior (OB) has also four main elements.ie; people, structure, technology, and external environment. When people come and join together in an organization to achieve or accomplish certain goals or objectives, some kind of structure is required and people use different techniques to get the job done properly. So, there is an interaction between elements; people, structure and technology which is influenced by the external environment.

The five key elements of Organizational Behavior (OB) are as follows:

Key elements of Organizational Behavior

People
Structure
Technology
Social System
External Environment

a. People

The existence of an organisation is impossible without people. People make up the internal social system of the organization. People consist of individuals and groups. Groups may be formal or informal, small or large, interrelated, and complex. People are dynamic in nature as they interact with each other and also influence each other. Groups may form, change, and dissolve. Organisations are established to serve the people.

b. Structure

In this world, everything has a structure. For example, the human body, tree, house, and even the book you are reading now has its own type of structure. In an organisation, structure defines the roles and relationships of people. It leads to a division of work.ie; Some may be executives; others may be supervisors, assistants, persons, and workers. The structure clarifies the authority responsibility relationships. All of these people are related to each other to accomplish the objectives in a coordinated manner.

c. Technology

In today’s world without technology work would be either difficult or even impossible. It provides economic and physical resources to make people’s jobs easy. The people are given the assistance of machines, tools, methods, and resources. The nature of is contingent/dependent upon the nature of tasks and scale of operations. Technology may also put restrictions on the freedom of people.

d. Social System:
Everything around us is society and everyone in the social lives together. The social system determines the organisational work environment and from which the organisation can operate.As people cannot live alone just like organisation cannot run alone its job.The organisation has to do its activity with the help of the employee.

e.  External environment

The external environment is an important element of OB. An organisation operates in a larger social system and is influenced by the external environment which includes socio-cultural, economic, political, legal, technological, and geographical forces. These forces influence people’s attitudes, motives, and working conditions in an organisation in many ways. Similarly, the organisation also has also an influence over the environment but the degree of influence is less. The organisation imports inputs from the environment and exports output to the environment.
