Define learning. What are its characteristics?
The process of learning is continuous which starts right from the time of birth of an individual and continues till the death. We all are engaged in the learning endeavours in order to develop our adaptive capabilities as per the requirements of the changing environment. For a learning to occur, two things are important: 1. The presence of a stimulus in the environment and 2. The innate dispositions like emotional and instinctual dispositions. A person keeps on learning across all the stages of life, by constructing or reconstructing experiences under the influence of emotional and instinctual dispositions.

Psychologists in general define Learning as relatively permanent behavioural modifications which take place as a result of experience. This definition of learning stresses on three important elements of learning:

Learning involves a behavioural change which can be better or worse.
This behavioural change should take place as a result of practice and experience. Changes resulting from maturity or growth cannot be considered as learning
This behavioural change must be relatively permanent and last for a relatively long time enough.
John B Watson is one amongst the first thinkers who has proven that behavioural changes occur as a result of learning. Watson is believed to be the founder of Behavioural school of thought, which gained its prominence or acceptability around the first half of the 20th century. Gales defined Learning as the behavioural modification which occurs as a result of experience as well as training. Crow and Crow defined learning as the process of acquisition of knowledge, habits and attitudes. According to E.A, Peel, Learning can be described as a change in the individual which takes place as a result of the environmental change. H.J. Klausmeir described Learning as a process which leads to some behavioural change as a result of some experience, training, observation, activity, etc.
Characteristics of Learning:
On the basis of analysis of various definitions of learning Yokam, Simpson and Mursel have given the following characteristics of learning:

1. Learning is Growth.
2. Learning is Adjustment.
3. Learning is Intelligent.
4. Learning is Active.
5. Learning is the product of Environment.
6. Learning is both Individual and Social.
7. Learning is Purposeful.
8. Learning is organising Experience.
9. All living is Learning.
10. True Learning affects the conduct of the learner.
11. Learning is Universal.
12. Learning is Change.
13. Learning is a Process not a product.
14. Learning is transferable.
15. Learning is total reaction of the individual to total situation.
Learning is described as an experience acquisition process.
In the complex form, learning can be described as process of acquisition, retention and modification of experience.
It re-establishes the relationship between a stimulus and response.
It is a method of problem solving and is concerned about making adjustments with the environment.
It involves all those gamut of activities which may have a relatively permanent effect on the individual.
The process of learning is concerned about experience acquisition, retention of experiences, and experience development in a step by step manner, synthesis of both old and new experiences for creating a new pattern.
Learning is concerned about cognitive, conative and affective aspects. Knowledge acquisition process is cognitive, any change in the emotions is affective and conative is acquisition of new habits or skills.

Learning is Purposeful
Each student sees a learning situation from a different viewpoint. Each student is a unique individual whose past experiences affect readiness to learn and understanding of the requirements involved.


Learning is a Result of Experience
Since learning is an individual process, the instructor cannot do it for the student. The student can learn only from personal experiences; therefore, learning and knowledge cannot exist apart from a person.

Learning is Multifaceted
Learning is multifaceted in still another way. While learning the subject at hand, students may be learning other things as well. They may be developing attitudes about aviation-good or bad-depending on what they experience.

Learning is an Active Process
Students do not soak up knowledge like a sponge absorbs water. The instructor cannot assume that students remember something just because they were in the classroom, shop, or airplane when the instructor presented the material.
