Discuss the major OD interventions.
OD interventions are the building blocks which are the planned activities designed to improve the organization’s functioning through participation of the members of the organization.
Interventions
Some OD Programs may use only one or a few of these interventions, while other programmes may use several of them simultaneously. Some of the many OD interventions are.

1. Diagnostic activity:
This activity involves collection of all the pertinent information about the state of the organization. This can be done through the organization’s operations records, observation of task activities, meetings with subordinates, and interviews with workers and so on. This could establish the current health of the organization.

This information is analyzed and the information as well as the analysis is communicated to members. Based on this information, as well as the feedback obtained from the members, some action plans are designed which are intended to improve the health of the organization. The feedback from members is intended to measure perceptions and attitudes such as job satisfaction, supervisory style and so on. It would help the supervisors to understand better and improve upon their relationship with their subordinates.

2. Team building:
Team building activities are designed to enhance the effectiveness and satisfaction of individuals who work in groups in order to improve the effectiveness of the entire group. It is important to recognize work group’s problems as early as possible so that solutions can be applied before the problems can do any damage.
These may be task related problems or personality conflict and personality cult problems within the group. The group’s work related issues can be streamlined by changing the way things are done, by redirecting the resources, utilized and by re-examining the work processes.

The interpersonal relationships within the team can be improved by creating the environment which is open and trustworthy, where members can openly and freely communicate their feelings and thoughts, where leadership evolves on the basis of respect and functional excellence and where conflicts are resolved on the basis of mutual understanding.

3. Sensitivity training:
Sensitivity training refers to a method of changing behaviour through unstructured group interaction. The idea is that in such training periods, the participants can openly express their ideas, beliefs, perceptions and attitudes and they learn about interpersonal behaviour. Such training could result in empathy for others, increased tolerance for individual differences, improved listening skills and greater trust in each other.

4. Intergroup relationships:
Just as there are problems within a group, there are problems among two or more different groups who are interdependent among themselves. The activities of these groups must be synchronized and coordinated to achieve the organizational goals and any unhealthy competition between the groups must be eliminated.

Other problems may involve conflicts over overlapping responsibilities or confused lines of authority. Some examples of such groups, where conflicts may lie, are sales and production, line and staff, labour and management, hospital administrators and doctors in a hospital and so on. All these problems and conflicts must be solved in a spirit of trust, goodwill and openness.

5. Process consultation:
The purpose of process consultation is for an outside OD consultant to assist the management, “to perceive, under­stand and act upon process events within the organization.

The consultant observes the processes such as communication patterns, decision making and leadership styles, methods of cooperation and conflict resolution among members and groups and acts as a guide or a coach who advises on how these processes can be improved.

In general, all OD efforts are designed to bring changes in the conceptual environment of an organization as well as the outlook of organizational members. Each member begins to see himself as a resource to others and is willing to lend his support to his colleagues when such support is needed.
The conceptual environment brings about open and free expression of feelings, emotions and perceptions. It also helps members to develop interpersonal competence including communication skills and an insight into themselves and others.

Types of Intervention
All the steps of intervention are the result of scientific theories and evidence. They are established protocols and not just (as the cliché says) “run-it-up-the-flagpole-and-see-who-salutes” solutions. As such, there are different types of interventions to meet the needs of different problems within the organization.

Human Process Interventions
These are interventions targeting interpersonal relationships and the dynamics of group performance.

On an individual basis, they can be used to change the way an individual such as a manager communicates with employees or even the way employees communicate with one another. They can be used to alter unproductive behaviors, to create productive habits and to increase overall self esteem.

Group interventions look at the way groups are formed and how they function to achieve their goals. Interventions may include things like team building skills to change the dynamics within a group or evaluate and address intergroup communication. These interventions may also target large groups such as one consisting of management, employees and stakeholders.

Sometimes, as noted above, a third party might be brought in to consult. One reason this might occur is the development of an “observer bias.” Simply put, that refers to the tendency most people have to see what they expect to see. Consultants bring a fresh view to the situation and also fresh methodology. Another reason for importing a consultant is to resolve conflicts. Many times conflict is a positive factor because it can fuel discussion and lead to solutions. It can also, however, result in stalemates where no progress is made at all. Consultants with no stake in the discussion can bring reason to the issue.

Technology and Structural Interventions
What are Organizational Development Interventions?

These are interventions built upon the successful implementation of technology into organizational systems. That, of course, entails not only analyzing which technologies should be brought on board, but making certain employees have the competencies to use them. The interventions also address problems in organizational design. That is, the structure of function in the organization and whether it is effective in enabling the organization to adapt to change. For instance, one design organizations follow is the central authority model. This assumes one person or small group of people in management make all decisions autonomously. There is rigid control and employees have little or no input. Another model, decentralized management, allows employees and others to have a voice in decision making. Employees interact with customers and clients and have a stake in company success. Additionally, in this model, there are incentives for innovation and improvement.

This intervention assesses quality management and looks at whether organizations make rapid adjustments to meet demands or whether they are continuously making changes as part of the company culture. It also attempts to increase productivity while making jobs more interesting and challenging to improve the quality of life for employees.

HR Interventions
While organizational development is not the same thing as a human resource department, the two do work together. Issues may be identified within an organization with regard to “talent development,” performance management, child care and even diversity that require the development of an intervention strategy using the HR department.

Diversity is a major cultural, and so industrial, topic today. Things such as gender, sexual identification, age, race, disabilities and even culture enter the business arena and impact the ability of organizations to meet their goals.
Another intervention is in the area of employee wellness. This involves promoting active lifestyles and stress management among other health issues for employees and other organization members.

All of these interventions may be seen through one of three lenses. They can affect transformational change, which means the organization is completely “rewired.” They can also be continuous change in which gradual transformation and adaptation are woven into the fabric of the organization through policies and culture. The last lens is trans organizational change in which adaptations occur through mergers, acquisitions or networking.
