Define organisational culture. Discuss its implications on
organisational behaviour

Organizational culture is defined as the underlying beliefs, assumptions, values and ways of interacting that contribute to the unique social and psychological environment of an organisation.

ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE DEFINITION AND CHARACTERISTICS

Organizational culture includes an organisation’s expectations, experiences, philosophy, as well as the values that guide member behaviour, and is expressed in member self-image, inner workings, interactions with the outside world, and future expectations. Culture is based on shared attitudes, beliefs, customs, and written and unwritten rules that have been developed over time and are considered valid (The Business Dictionary).

Culture also includes the organisation’s vision, values, norms, systems, symbols, language, assumptions, beliefs, and habits (Needle, 2004).

Simply stated, organisational culture is “the way things are done around here” (Deal & Kennedy, 2000).

While the above definitions of culture express how the construct plays out in the workplace, other definitions stress employee behavioural components, and how organisational culture directly influences the behaviours of employees within an organisation.

Under this set of definitions, organisational culture is a set of shared assumptions that guide what happens in organisations by defining appropriate behaviour for various situations (Ravasi & Schultz, 2006). Organizational culture affects the way people and groups interact with each other, with clients, and with stakeholders. Also, organisational culture may influence how much employees identify with their organisation (Schrodt, 2002).

In business terms, other phrases are often used interchangeably, including “corporate culture,” “workplace culture,” and “business culture.”

Organisational behaviour provides solution as well as insight towards solution to many
challenges which are faced by the organisations. Some of the important roles
performed by organisational behaviour in management of business are as follows:-
1. Globalisation- Due to globalisation, organisations are no longer confined to one
particular country. The Manager’s job is changing with the expansion of the
organisations across the national borders. Example, Volkswagen builds its cars
in Mexico, Mercedes and BMW in South Africa. Due to globalisation, the
management has to deal with the problems of unfamiliar languages, laws, work
ethics, management styles etc. The functions of hiring, training, etc must
acquire a global perspective. Organisational Behaviour helps the management
to become flexible, and proactive and enables it to execute the organisation on
a global scale.
2. Managing work Force Diversity- Organisations are a hetrogeneous mix of
people in terms of age, gender, race etc. Managing the workforce diversity has
become a global concern. Managers have to deal with individuals and groups
belonging to different ethnic cultures. They have to exercise control and
channelize behaviour in the desired direction. Organisational behaviour help
the managers to effectively deal with work force diversity by promoting its
awareness, increasing diversity skills, encouraging culture and gender
diversity.
3. Improving Quality and Productivity- Industries are facing the problem of
excess supply. This has increased competition to a large extent. Almost every
Manager is confronting the same problem of improving the productivity,
quality of the goods and services their organisation is providing. Programmes
such as business process reengineering, and total Quality Management are
being implemented to achieve these ends. Organisational Behaviour helps the
Managers to empower their employees, as they are the major forces for
implementing this change.
4. Improving customer service-Most of the employees work in service sector. The
jobs in the service sector, is very demanding. It requires continuous interaction
with the organisations clients i.e. the customers. Management has to ensure that
the employees do everything to satisfy the customers of the organisation. The
attitude and behaviour of an employee affects the customer satisfaction.
Organisational Behaviour helps the managers to improve customer service and
organisational performance.
5. Improving people skills- Organisational Behaviour helps in better management
of business as it helps in improving the skills of the people. It provides insight
into the skills that the employees can use on the job such as designing jobs and
creating effective teams.
6. Innovation and Change- Organisational Behaviour helps in stimulating
innovation and change. Employees can either be a hurdle or an instrument of
change. It is organisational behaviour which fosters ideas and techniques to
promote innovation and change by improving employees creativity.
7. Work life balance- Organisations that do not help employees to achieve work
life balance will not be able to retain their most talented employees.
Organisational behaviour helps i designing flexible jobs which can help
employees deal with work life balance issues.
8. Promoting ethical Behaviour- Sometimes the organisations are in a situation of
ethical dilemma where they have to define right and wrong. It is Organisational
Behaviour which helps an important role by helping the management to create
such a work environment which is ethically healthy and increases work
productivity, job satisfaction and organisational citizenship behaviour.
9. Creating a positive Work Environment.- Organisational behaviour helps in
creating a positive work environment in today’s where competitive pressures
are stronger than before. OB helps to develop resilience, human strength, and it
fosters vitality.
5. Conclusion
Thus, Organisational Behaviour plays an important role in the management of
business. It is that field of study which finds out the impact that individuals, groups
and structure have on behaviour within an organisation and it applies that knowledge
to make organisations work more effectively.
