What are the different approaches to organisational
effectiveness?


Organizational effectiveness is increasingly becoming a trend that companies are marching towards. While many consider it as a mere buzzword without any concrete meaning, some forward-looking organizations are treating it to gauge their success. Essentially, organizational effectiveness means exactly what it sounds like, how well and efficiently an organization is able to achieve its vision and goals. Invariably, organizational effectiveness is essential for companies to impact its bottom line, attract the top talent, as well as, survive and thrive amongst its competitors.

Table of contents

What is organizational effectiveness?
Importance of organizational effectiveness
Top 4 organizational effectiveness approaches

Before diverting any resources to this buzzword, business leaders often question what is organizational effectiveness. In the simplest terms, organizational effectiveness refers to an organization’s ability to meet its objectives. Every organization has a certain set of goals that it seeks to achieve by a combination of operations, processes and people. Organizational effectiveness is all about being able to realize the intended outcomes in the most effective and efficient manner.

It is a comprehensive concept which takes into consideration the performance of each aspect that contributes to the running of an organization. Employee performance, managerial effectiveness, process efficiency, collaboration between different areas and organizational behavior, collectively contribute to organizational effectiveness. Organizations ranking high on all or most of these parameters and others tend to rank in the higher rungs of effectiveness, while those that face gaps in these, struggle with optimal levels of performance.

Importance of organizational effectiveness

Organizational effectiveness has a direct correlation with company success. As the effectiveness quotient of an organization goes up, its ability to serve all its stakeholders better as well as make greater profits increases. Here are a few factors that illustrate the importance of organizational effectiveness:


Cost and resource efficiency
Effectiveness is closely associated with efficiency across the organization. Organizational effectiveness enables companies and business leaders to achieve maximum output with minimum input as the performance level is optimal. At the same time, effectiveness ensures that resources, beyond financial ones, like human resources, technology assets, etc., are used and allocated efficiently. Invariably, organizational effectiveness promotes efficient allocation, considerably reducing costs and disbursing limited resources to promote best results.

Greater employee engagement
An effective organization is defined by great performance across all verticals, in a holistic manner. This suggests that employees who work in such organizations are able to deliver top performance, without compromising on their wellness, leveraging the efficient processes and practices. Invariably, this augments their work experience and promotes engagement which results in greater loyalty, retention and commitment, further, accentuating their performance.

Better customer outcomes
Organizational effectiveness definitely takes into account augmenting the efficacy of customer service channels. An effective organization supports its customers in the most promising manner to create a pleasant experience. Right from its offerings to its service, organizational effectiveness plays a major role in enhancing customer outcomes.

Impact on bottom line
Finally, overall effectiveness has a direct impact on the organization’s bottom line. When all parts of the company work like a well-oiled machine, the profits are bound to soar high. The bottom line is positively impacted by decreased costs, greater employee productivity, happier customers and overall increased efficiency and efficacy.

Top 4 organizational effectiveness approaches

Organizational effectiveness is not a result of simply reducing costs whenever possible. Rather, it requires following a strategic and comprehensive approach based on specific objectives and principles. Most commonly, companies are found to be following these 4 organizational effectiveness approaches to commence and accelerate their journey to success:


Goal attainment approach
The first approach to organizational effectiveness majorly focuses on the goals and objectives achieved. Put simply, according to the goal attainment approach, each organization sets forth a set of goals and objectives that it seeks to achieve through its various efforts, i.e. achievement of goals is the reason for existence of the organization. Therefore, for this approach, organizational effectiveness comes into play when a company is able to achieve its goals, mainly in the form of profits and efficiency. While this approach is important to ensure how effectively an organization reaches its goals, the dynamic nature of the goals and varying scope of long-term vs short-term goals, makes it slightly challenging to use this to assess organizational effectiveness.

Systems resource approach
The systems resource approach came as an answer to the challenges of the goal attainment approach. While the latter focuses only on the end, the systems resource approach takes into account the means to the end. The foundation of this approach is that success of any organization depends not only on the goal it achieves, but how it achieves the same. Therefore, there is focus on how effectively an organization is able to acquire the resources it needs to achieve its desired goals or outcomes. Here, effectiveness is not only a result of goal attainment, but rather depends on resource acquisition. However, the challenge majorly lies in the dilemma that higher resource acquisition does not always translate to greater performance or success.

Strategic constituency approach
According to the strategic constituency, organizations survive and thrive in an environment where their success is dependent on a number of stakeholders. These include the employees, managers, shareholders, customers, partners, suppliers, etc. Organizational effectiveness is, thus, contingent to the company’s ability to satisfy these constituencies in its environment. Effectiveness depends on how well the organization is able to identify its various strategic constituencies and their expectations and, thus, navigate ways to achieve the same. At the same time, since each constituency has its own goals, power and influence, organizational effectiveness depends on the efficacy of trade-offs between one constituency over the other, in case of a conflict.

Competing values approach
The final approach takes into account the competing values and goals that an organization strives to achieve. At any given point of time, a company is conflicted on competing values which lead to different outcomes, all of which are necessary for organizational success. For instance, an organization might want to induce structure and discipline, but at the same time, might wish to promote autonomy, innovation and flexibility. Likewise, competing values come in the form of increasing profits and customer satisfaction vs augmenting employee wellness. Therefore, organizational effectiveness, according to this approach, assesses a company’s ability to strike the right balance between such competing values to create a win-win situation for all.

Organizational effectiveness: The starting point

Promoting organizational effectiveness is a collective responsibility which falls on the shoulders of all the stakeholders of a company. An integrated approach that seeks to understand and serve the interest of each of these stakeholders is key to achieving organizational effectiveness. However, working on all aspects at once can be chaotic and self-defeating. Therefore, organizations can consider starting their journey to improve organizational effectiveness by focusing on the internal stakeholders, i.e. the employees and the leadership. In such a situation, partnering with platforms like SuperBeings that gauge and augment employee experience as well as offer avenues for leadership development is something to bet on. Invariably, organizational effectiveness is integral to company success and those who start early on in the race are most likely to reach the top.
