What are the sources of organisational power? Discuss
how organisational power is acquired.
5 Sources of Power in Organizations
Organizations are made up of individuals that exercise greater or lesser degrees of power. Sometimes, authority stems from a person's title in the organization, or from specialized knowledge and expertise. Others may exercise power through interpersonal relationships or the force of their personality. And still others gain influence through an ability to grant access to important resources.
Legitimate or Positional Power
Legitimate power is also known as positional power. It's derived from the position a person holds in an organization’s hierarchy. Job descriptions, for example, require junior workers to report to managers and give managers the power to assign duties to their juniors.
For positional power to be exercised effectively, the person wielding it must be deemed to have earned it legitimately. An example of legitimate power is that held by a company's CEO.
Expert Power Derived from Possessing Knowledge
Knowledge is power. Expert power is derived from possessing knowledge or expertise in a particular area. Such people are highly valued by organizations for their problem solving skills. People who have expert power perform critical tasks and are therefore deemed indispensable.
The opinions, ideas and decisions of people with expert power are held in high regard by other employees and hence greatly influence their actions. Possession of expert power is normally a stepping stone to other sources of power such as legitimate power. For example, a person who holds expert power can be promoted to senior management, thereby giving him legitimate power.
Referent Power Derived from Interpersonal Relationships
Referent power is derived from the interpersonal relationships that a person cultivates with other people in the organization. People possess reference power when others respect and like them. Referent power arises from charisma, as the charismatic person influences others via the admiration, respect and trust others have for her.
Referent power is also derived from personal connections that a person has with key people in the organization's hierarchy, such as the CEO. It's the perception of the personal relationships that she has that generates her power over others.
Coercive Power Derived from Ability to Influence Others
Coercive power is derived from a person's ability to influence others via threats, punishments or sanctions. A junior staff member may work late to meet a deadline to avoid disciplinary action from his boss. Coercive power is, therefore, a person's ability to punish, fire or reprimand another employee. Coercive power helps control the behavior of employees by ensuring that they adhere to the organization's policies and norms.
Reward Power and Ability to Influence Allocation of Incentives
Reward power arises from the ability of a person to influence the allocation of incentives in an organization. These incentives include salary increments, positive appraisals and promotions. In an organization, people who wield reward power tend to influence the actions of other employees.
Reward power, if used well, greatly motivates employees. But if it's applied through favoritism, reward power can greatly demoralize employees and diminish their output.


Acquisition of Power:
Every manager has a two dimensional power base. The first is the positional power by virtue of the status in the organisation and the personal power because of personal characteristics and knowledge. A successful manager is that who has built up high positional as well as personal power base. The factors which influence the acquisition of power are as explained below.
A. Acquisition of Positional Power:
Whetton and Cameron have proposed some of the factors for building and enhancing positional power.

These factors are:

1. Centrality:
Centrality refers to those activities that are most central to the work flow of the organisation. The manager will acquire positional power if the information filters through him. This will give him some say in the work of many sub units. For example, the finance manager approves all the expenses and the payments to all the departments of the organisation. This gives him an extra power base to affect the behaviour of other departments.

2. Scarcity:

When resources in the organisation are scarce, then there will be a struggle in the different departments for acquiring these resources. Whosoever is the winner of the struggle, will acquire power. Power will become apparent only when the resources are scarce. When the there is abundance in the organisation of different types of resources. Scarcity will not be a factor to judge the power.

Salanick and Pfeffer have concluded from a study conducted in a university that the power of academic departments was associated with their ability to obtain funds from research grants and other outside resources and this was more critical to their power than was the number of undergraduates taught by the department.

3. Uncertainty:

Uncertainty about future events can play havoc with the plans of different departments. Uncertainty may relate to reduction in supply of resources, fall in demand of company’s products, change in government policies etc. The managers who are able to cope with such uncertainty and who can gain from such uncertainty can acquire power.

According to Kanter, “The most power goes to those people in those functions that provide greater control over what the organisation finds currently problematic, sales and marketing people when markets are competitive, production experts when materials are scarce and demand is high, personnel or labour relations specialists when labour is important, lawyers, lobbyists and external relations specialists when government regulations impinge, finance and accounting executives when business is bad and money tight. There is a turning to those elements of the system that seem to have the power to create more certainty in the face of depending and to generate a more advantageous position for the organisation.”

4. Substitutability:

The more valuable a person is to the organisation, the greater power he holds. There are some people in the organisation, whose contributions are so much, that they become indispensable. This indispensability may be the result of their specialty, expertise and knowledge which cannot be substituted easily by others. Any change in the marketability of such specialty will change the power base as well. Even though philosophy says that “Nobody is indispensable”, but in practice, some people are comparatively more indispensable than others.

B. Acquisition of Personal Power:
Personal power can be acquired and enhanced by enhancing individual traits. The following factors may be considered in this context;

1. Expertise:

A manager can enhance or acquire personal power through the expertise. Expertise can be gained by possession of special knowledge which can be gained by education, training and experience. Expertise can also be gained by information gained by having access to data and/or people. Power, though can be acquired through expertise, but to maintain it or to enhance it the managers must make sure that there is a critical need in the organisation for their knowledge and skills that cannot be conveniently obtained elsewhere.
2. Referent Power:

Referent power contributes to a large extent to the personal power of the manager. The manager should have a charisma that attracts the subordinates to him and make them follow him in every way. Pleasant personality characteristics, agreeable behaviour patterns and attractive postures enhance referent power.

3. Hard Work:

A person who is hard working and sincere in his efforts will have more personal power because of this expertise and reference. A hard working person is perceived to know more about the job and thus, most sought out for advice. A sincere person is always respected by the subordinates. Subordinates, generally, depend upon a hard working and sincere manager.

Tactics to Gain Power:

There are several tactics which individuals and groups can use to gain power in an organisation. Recent research indicates that these are standardized ways by which power holders attempt to get what they want. Power tactics are used by the employees to translate their power bases into specific actions.
