When does demand pull inflation occur?

Demand-pull inflation
Demand-pull inflation is a period of inflation which arises from rapid growth in aggregate demand. It occurs when economic growth is too fast.

If aggregate demand (AD) rises faster than productive capacity (LRAS), then firms will respond by putting up prices, creating inflation.

Inflation – a sustained increase in the price level.
Demand-pull inflation – inflation caused by AD increasing faster than AS.
Demand-pull inflation means:

Excess demand and ‘too much money chasing too few goods.’
The economy is at (or very close to) full employment/full capacity.
The economy will be growing at a rate faster than the long-run trend rate.
A falling unemployment rate.
How demand-pull inflation occurs

If aggregate demand is rising at 4%, but productive capacity is only rising at 2.5%; firms will see demand outstripping supply. Therefore, they respond by increasing prices.

Also, as firms produce more, they employ more workers, creating a rise in employment and fall in unemployment. This increased demand for workers puts upward pressure on wages, leading to wage-push inflation. Higher wages increase the disposable income of workers leading to a rise in consumer spending.

Economic growth and long-run trend rate
The long trend rate of economic is the sustainable rate of economic growth; it is the rate of economic without any demand-pull inflation. If economic growth exceeds this long-run trend rate, then it will cause inflationary pressures.

In a boom, growth is above the long-run trend rate, and it is in this situation where we will get demand-pull inflation.

Causes of demand-pull inflation

Lower interest rates. A cut in interest rates causes a rise in consumer spending and higher investment. This boost to demand causes a rise in AD and inflationary pressures.
The rise in house prices. Rising house prices create a positive wealth effect and boost consumer spending. This leads to a rise in economic growth.
Rising real wages. For example, unions bargaining for higher wage rates.
Devaluation. Devaluation in the exchange rate increases domestic demand (exports cheaper, imports more expensive). Devaluation will also cause cost-push inflation (imports more expensive)
Demand-Pull Inflation
The demand-pull inflation occurs when the aggregate demand increases at a much
higher rate than the aggregate supply. In other words, demand-pull inflation occurs
when, given the aggregate supply, aggregate demand increases substantially. Increase
in aggregate demand may be caused by (a) monetary factors, i.e., increase in
money supply and/or (b) real factors, i.e., increase in demand for real output. Let
us now see how monetary and real factors cause inflation.
(a) Increase in Money Supply and Demand-Pull Inflation: One important
reason for demand-pull inflation is increase in money supply in excess of increase
in potential output. Whether increase in money supply in excess of increase in
output is the only cause of inflation is a controversial issue. But the fact is that
monetary expansion in excess of increase in the level of output is one of the most
important factors causing demand-pull inflation.
(b) Real-Factor Demand-Pull Inflation: Real-Factor demand-pull inflation
can be caused by any or many of the following real factors.
(i) Increase in the government expenditure without change in tax revenue;
(ii) Cut in tax rates without change in the government expenditure;
(iii) Increase in investment;
(iv) Increase in consumer demand;
(v) Increase in exports given imports; and
(vi) Decrease in imports given the exports.
The first four factors straightaway increase the level of disposable income.
Increase in aggregate income increases aggregate demand causing demand-pull
inflation. For example, suppose that the government increases its spending financed
through borrowings abroad. The rise in the government spending generates
additional demand and, therefore, aggregate demand increases. Since there is, by
assumption, full employment, additional resources can be acquired only by bidding
a higher price. This pushes the prices up without increase in the output. Therefore,
the transaction demand for money increases. In order to meet the additional
transaction demand for money, people sell their financial assets—bonds and
securities. Consequently, bond and security prices go down and the rate of interest
goes up. In the product market, prices increase to such an extent that the additional
government spending is absorbed by the price rise. This is how other real factors
also cause inflation.
