Elaborate the laws of diminishing marginal utility along
with its assumptions.
Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility
The law of diminishing marginal utility is an important concept to understand. It basically falls in the category of Microeconomics, but it is of equal and significant importance in our day-to-day decisions. In this article, you will find the definition of the law of diminishing marginal utility, its detailed explanation with the help of a schedule and diagram, assumptions we make in the law of diminishing marginal utility and the exceptions where the law of diminishing marginal utility does not apply.

We will first start with the basic definition of ‘Utility’.

Utility:

Utility is the capacity of a commodity through which human wants are satisfied.

Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility:

The law of diminishing marginal utility is comprehensively explained by Alfred Marshall. According to his definition of the law of diminishing marginal utility, the following happens:

“During the course of consumption, as more and more units of a commodity are used, every successive unit gives utility with a diminishing rate, provided other things remaining the same; although, the total utility increases.”

Utils:

'Utils' is considered as the measurable 'unit' of utility.

Explanation for the Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility:

We can briefly explain Marshall’s theory with the help of an example. Assume that a consumer consumes 6 apples one after another. The first apple gives him 20 utils (units for measuring utility). When he consumes the second and third apple, the marginal utility of each additional apple will be lesser. This is because with an increase in the consumption of apples, his desire to consume more apples falls.

Therefore, this example proves the point that every successive unit of a commodity used gives the utility with the diminishing rate.

We can explain this more clearly with the help of a schedule and diagram.

Schedule for Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility:

In the above table, the total utility obtained from the first apple is 20 utils, which keep on increasing until we reach our saturation point at 5th apple. On the other hand, marginal utility keeps on diminishing with every additional apple consumed. When we consumed the 6th apple, we have gone over the limit. Hence, the marginal utility is negative and the total utility falls.

With the help of the schedule, we have made the following diagram:


Saturation Point: The point where the desire to consume the same product anymore becomes zero.

Disutility:

If you still consume the product after the saturation point, the total utility starts to fall. This is known as disutility.

When the first apple is consumed, the marginal utility is 20. When the second apple is consumed, the marginal utility increases by 15 utils, which is less than the marginal utility of the 1st apple – because of the diminishing rate. Therefore, we have shown that the utility of apples consumed diminishes with every increase of apple consumed.

Similarly, when we consumed the 5th apple, we are at our saturation point. If we consume another apple, i.e. 6th apple, we can see that the marginal utility curve has fallen to below X-axis, which is also known as ‘disutility’.

Assumptions in the Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility:

For the law of diminishing marginal utility to be true, we need to make certain assumptions. Each assumption is quite logical and understandable. If any of the assumptions are not true in the case, the law of diminishing marginal utility will not be true.

Following are the assumptions in the law of diminishing marginal utility:

The quality of successive units of goods should remain the same. If the quality of the goods increase or decrease, the law of diminishing marginal utility may not be proven true.
Consumption of goods should be continuous. If there comes a substantial break in the consumption of goods, the actual concept of diminishing marginal utility will be altered.

Consumer’s mental outlook should not change.
Unit of good should not be very few or small. In such a case, the utility may not be measured accurately.

Exceptions for the Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility:

The law of diminishing marginal utility states that with the consumption of every successive unit of commodity yields marginal utility with a diminishing rate. However, there are certain things on which the law of diminishing marginal utility does not apply.

Assumptions of Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility:

The law of DMU operates under certain specific conditions. Economists call them the ‘assumptions’ of this law.

These are as follows:

1. Cardinal measurement of utility:

It is assumed that utility can be measured and a consumer can express his satisfaction in quantitative terms such as 1, 2, 3, etc.

2. Monetary measurement of utility:

It is assumed that utility is measurable in monetary terms.

3. Consumption of reasonable quantity:

It is assumed that a reasonable quantity of the commodity is consumed. For example, we should compare MU of glassfuls of water and not of spoonful’s. If a thirsty person is given water in a spoon, then every additional spoon will yield him more utility. So, to hold the law true, suitable and proper quantity of the commodity should be consumed.

4. Continuous consumption:

It is assumed that consumption is a continuous process. For example, if one ice-cream is consumed in the morning and another in the evening, then the second ice-cream may provide equal or higher satisfaction as compared to the first one.

5. No change in Quality:

Quality of the commodity consumed is assumed to be uniform. A second cup of ice-cream with nuts and toppings may give more satisfaction than the first one, if the first ice-cream was without nuts or toppings.

6. Rational consumer:

The consumer is assumed to be rational who measures, calculates and compares the utilities of different commodities and aims at maximising total satisfaction.

7. Independent utilities:

It is assumed that all the commodities consumed by a consumer are independent. It means, MU of one commodity has no relation with MU of another commodity. Further, it is also assumed that one person’s utility is not affected by the utility of any other person.

8. MU of money remains constant:

As a consumer spends money on the commodity, he is left with lesser money to spend on other commodities. In this process, the remaining money becomes dearer to the consumer and it increases MU of money for the consumer. But, such an increase in MU of money is ignored. As MU of a commodity has to be measured in monetary terms, it is assumed that MU of money remains constant.

9. Fixed Income and prices:

It is assumed that income of the consumer and prices of the goods which the consumer wishes to purchase remain constant.

It must be noted that ‘Utility approach to Consumer’s Equilibrium’ is based on all these assumptions.

Diagrammatic Explanation of Law of DMU:

Let us understand the law with the help of Table 2.2 and Fig. 2.2:

Table 2.2: Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility

Units of Ice Cream	Total Utility (in utils)	Marginal Utility (in utils)
1	20	20
2	36	16
3	46	10
4	50	4
5	50	0 (Point of Satiety)
6	44	-6
In the diagram, units of ice-cream are shown along the X-axis and MU along the Y-axis. MU from each successive ice-cream is represented by points A, B, C, D and E. As seen, the rectangles (showing each level of satisfaction) become smaller and smaller with increase in consumption of ice-creams.

MU falls from 20 to 16 and then to 10 utils, when consumption is increased from 1st to 2nd and then to 3rd ice-cream. 5th ice­-cream has no utility (MU= 0) and this is known as the ‘Point of satiety’. When 6th ice-­cream is consumed, MU becomes negative. MU curve slopes downwards showing that MU of successive units is falling.

Law of diminishing marginal utility states that as the consumption of a commodity rises, marginal utility tends to fall. It is known as the fundamental psychological law.
Assumptions:
1) It is assumed that the unit of the consumer good is a standard one.
2) It is assumed that utility is measurable and can be expressed in quantitative terms.
3) The consumer's tastes and preferences remain same during the period of consumption.
4)There must be continuity in the consumption.
5) Marginal utility of money remains constant.
6) Income and prices of the goods remain unchanged during the period of consumption.

Let us make an in-depth study of the concept, assumptions, causes, limitations and issues of the law of diminishing marginal utility.

Concept:

A number of earlier writers like Bentham, Gossen and Marshall stated clearly the concept of diminishing marginal utility.

Liebhafsky stated the principle in the following way:

The satisfaction acquired from addi­tions to one’s stock of a good diminishes.

In the words of Marshall:

“The additional benefit which a person derives from a given increase of his stock of a thing diminishes with the every increase in the stock that he already has.” It means that more one has of anything; less important to him is any one unit of it.

The Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility, as defined above, is derived from one of the characteristics of human wants. It is observed that although a person cannot satisfy all of his wants, he can satisfy one of these provided he has the means to do it. As he gets more and more of a thing (say, an apple or tea), his intensity of desire for that thing gradually diminishes, indicating that additional utility decreases as its total stock increases.

As the consumption of a commodity increases the consumer’s TU also increases. He gets greater satisfaction as he eats more and more chocolates.

But as the consumption of chocolates increases his desire or inclination for every extra unit will gradually fall. In other words, his psychological capacity to appreciate every extra unit will gradually diminish. So every extra unit will add less and less to his total satisfaction. In other words, the rate of increase in TU will fall. In our example the second chocolate gives less satisfaction than the first one.

And a sixth one begins to make the consumer feel ill—total satisfaction from the assumption consumption of chocolate falls. From this emerges one famous law of economics, known as the Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility.

This law can be stated thus:

“The more one consumes of one commodity during any period of time the less satisfaction one gets from consuming an additional unit of it”.

As one adds to his (her) weekly consumption of chocolate, each additional unit adds to his TU or total satisfaction, but each unit adds less utility than the one before it.

Utility schedule presented in Table 4.1 can be represented diagrammatically. See Fig. 4.1. In Fig. 4.1 our representative consumer Mr. John is seen to add to his total satisfaction as he increases weekly purchase of chocolate until he is buying 5 units (bars) per day. A 6th bar per week gives him disutility or dissatis­faction.

Fig. 4.2 (which is derived from Fig. 4.1) illustrates the Law of Diminishing MU. This indicates that the additions to TU of chocolate became less as more bars per day are purchased. It is clear that the MU of the six bars per day is negative, i.e., the sixth bar causes a decrease in TU.

Total Utility and Marginal Utility

Assumptions of the Law:

The Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility is based on the assumptions:

1. The utility that a consumer gets can be measured and expressed in numbers (utils). Moreover, the units of the commodity must be properly defined.

2. The maximum price a consumer is ready to pay for the commodity depends on its marginal utility to him.

3. The taste and preference of the consumer remain unchanged during the period of purchases.

4. The initial amount of consumption is sufficient to give the consumer full satis­faction.
