What do you mean by Incremental revenue?


When businesses need to measure profit, they often consider the number of units sold for a set price. Incremental revenue is a way companies calculate the additional profits generated from increased sales. Learning about incremental revenue can be helpful for professionals in a variety of fields, especially marketing and sales. In this article, we define incremental revenue, give you the formula to calculate incremental revenue and provide examples of how this method can be used in the workplace.

What is incremental revenue?

Incremental revenue is the profit a business gains from an increase in sales. It can be used to determine the additional revenue generated by a certain product, investment or direct sale from a marketing campaign when the quantity of sales has grown.

Incremental revenue is often compared to the cost of a product. Businesses try to make sure the incremental revenue is higher than a product's incremental cost in order to generate a profit. Since incremental revenue doesn't account for overhead costs, companies use it mainly to look at overall profit margins.

Businesses use incremental revenue to calculate profit in the following areas:

Production: In manufacturing, incremental revenue is measured by the number of products sold at a certain price. Revenue is earned by additional sales or a change in the sales quantity.
Marketing: In marketing, incremental revenue is calculated from the additional sales generated by advertising efforts. Incremental revenue help business professionals determine the return on investment (ROI) from a marketing campaign. Data from incremental revenue calculations can also help business owners decide how much to spend on marketing in order to generate a certain amount of sales.
Investing: Investors use incremental revenue as a formula to analyze and compare which portfolio options bring in the best rate of return. This helps them determine where to allocate their finances.

The difference between marginal and incremental revenue

Incremental revenue and marginal revenue both calculate sales, but they differ in the number of sales taken into account. Incremental revenue is focused on sales generated by multiple units, while marginal revenue is calculated by analyzing the profits from the sale of one additional unit. While both types of revenue can be used for making business decisions, marginal revenue calculations are smaller in scope. Incremental revenues give a larger perspective of profits a business generates based on what it produces and sells.

For example, an automobile company may want to track the marginal revenue that's made from the sale of one additional car to complete an end-of-the-year sales figure. If they wanted to look at the incremental revenue, they might track the profits from 70 additional car sales.


How to calculate incremental revenue

Here is the formula for incremental revenue:

Incremental revenue = number of units x price per unit

Follow these steps to calculate incremental revenue:

Determine the number of units sold during a period of growth.

Determine the price of each unit sold during a period of growth.

Multiply the number of units by the price per unit.

The result is incremental revenue.

You can now use this number to make business decisions and compare the revenue to incremental costs. You can also use other calculations to evaluate if your company is earning enough profit from its sales.


Examples of incremental revenue calculations

Here are some examples of how to find and use incremental revenue for product sales, marketing and investing:

Example 1

Go Walk Shoes wants to measure the incremental revenue of their new running shoe during a sales increase in quarter one. The CFO calculates that 20,000 Trail Tech Sneakers were sold from July to September. They also note that the retail price of the sneaker was $60 during that period. The CFO multiplies the number of shoes sold (20,000) by the price of the shoe ($60) to get an incremental revenue total of $1,200,000.

The CFO now decides that the company can increase production of the Trail Tech Sneaker for the following quarter. They tell the marketing department about the success of the shoe and asks the team to allocate a portion of their budget to a small ad campaign designed to sell even more of the shoes in the next three months.

Example 2

A software company launched a two-month advertising campaign to attract consumers to purchase their anti-virus software. As a result, the company recorded an increase in sales. The marketing team wants to determine the ROI from this campaign. The senior marketing manager checks sales records to find the additional number of units sold based on the previous year's data, which was an extra 5,000 units. They note the price of the software, which sells for $39 a download. They multiply the number of extra units sold (5,000) by the price of the software ($39) to find the incremental value of $195,000.

The team can now take the incremental revenue amount of $195,000 and compare it to the amount of money spent on marketing to determine if the ROI is high enough to continue the ad campaign.

Example 3

An investor wants to expand their stock portfolio over the next year. They study market trends and reads financial analysis reports complied by stock experts. They consider stock A, which showed an incremental revenue of 5% over the last quarter. They also look at stock B with an incremental revenue of 6%. They decide to buy stock B due to the higher amount of incremental revenue it generated in the previous quarter.

Example 4

Great Taste just launched a new frozen health shake called Great Greens in a trial market of 1,000 stores. They want to determine how successful the product is after five months on the market. Sales reports show that they sold 800,000 units over the five-month period. Each unit cost buyers $4.50. Great Taste is pleased to find its incremental revenue for the product launch is $3,600,000. They can now compare this to the production costs for Great Greens to determine their overall profit from the product.
