State the law of demand and draw a demand curve. Why
does the demand curve slope downwards to the right?

Law of Demand and Demand Curve
Law of demand is defined as “quantity demand of product decreases if the price of the product increases.” That is if the price of the product rises then the quantity demand falls. Because the opportunity cost of consumer increase which leads consumers to go for any other alternative or they may not buy it. The law of demand and its exceptions are really interesting concepts with many real-life applications. Let us understand.


Consumer Preference and Demand

Consumer preference theory helps us to understand which combination of two goods a consumer will buy based on the market prices of the goods and subject to a consumer’s budget constraint. What we are interested in, is the amount of a good a consumer actually buys. This is best explained in Microeconomics using the demand function. We will see how to derive the demand function from Indifference curves and what the famous law of demand means.

Browse more Topics under Theory Of Consumer Behaviour

Preferences of the Consumer
Demand Curve and Law of Demand
Market Demand
Derivation of Demand Curve

We know that a consumer maximizes his satisfaction by choosing a bundle of two goods that also falls within his budget, through the IC analysis. We will use this to derive the demand curve for a commodity. Let us consider two goods: X and Y. Let the prices of the two goods are Px and Py and the money income is “M”. The consumer can maximize his utility at the point where his budget line is tangential to the indifference curve. Let this be point ‘E’ in the diagram. The quantity of X consumed is X1.




Fig.1: Derivation of Demand Curve

 We now vary the price level of good X, keeping the price of good Y and money income constant. Let Px fall. With the same money income, the real purchasing power of the consumer has actually increased. The maximum amount of good X he can buy increases as Px falls since “M” is unchanged. So, the horizontal intercept of the budget line changes (shifts to the right). But the vertical intercept is unchanged because “M” and Py are unchanged. Therefore, the budget line must pivot away from the origin along the horizontal axis as Px falls.

The new budget line is now tangential to a higher IC at point ‘F’. Here, the quantity of X consumed is X 2, which is greater than X1. So, at a lower price of X, a greater quantity of it can be consumed. Again, let the Px fall further. The budget line pivots further away and the new point of tangency becomes G. The quantity of X consumed is X3.

Demand Schedule

We get a Demand schedule that looks like:

Price of X

Quantity Demanded
P1	X1
P2	X2
P3	X3
Different quantities demanded at varying price levels are given in the schedule above. We can graph these combinations of price and quantity demanded of X. The resulting curve is the Demand Curve of X. It is a graphical representation of various quantities demanded of a commodity at different prices.

What is Law of Demand?

Note in figure 1, that the demand curve slopes downwards. This is because as we kept decreasing the price of X, the quantity demanded kept increasing. At a lower price, consumers have a more real income to spend on purchasing the same good, so they can purchase more of it. This leads to a negative relationship between price and quantity demanded. This relation, in economics, is called the Law of Demand. It states that ceteris paribus (other things being equal), “As price falls, the quantity demanded increases and vice versa.”

Law of Demand Graph

law of demand graph

Source: economics discussion

Exceptions to the Law of Demand

There are certain cases in which when the price rises, quantity demanded also rises (and vice versa). Thus, the law of demand does not apply in these cases. These are termed as exceptions to the law of demand:

When the good in question is a prestige good. As the price rises, quantity demanded must rise for prestige value.
When the good is a necessity. Even if the price rises, consumption must rise as the good is a necessity.
An expectation of a further increase in prices causes more to be consumed at current high prices.
When the good in question is a Giffen good.
Learn more about Exceptions to the Law of Demand in more detail here.

Solved Example for You

Question: Is the demand curve of a good always downward sloping?

Answer: No, the demand curve of a good may not necessarily be downward sloping. There are certain exceptions to the law of demand. In these cases, as price increases, quantity demanded also increases. Examples of such cases are Giffen goods, necessities, prestige goods, etc. Here, the price-demand relation becomes positive and we get a positive slope demand curve. In all other cases where the law of demand prevails, the demand curve is downward sloping.


Causes of Downward Slope
Downward slope refers to the choice of obtaining demand through the customer however it is subsidized through shopping and willingness to pay the price. The demand regulation states that there's an inversely proportional relationship between the price and demand or quantity of a commodity. When the price of a commodity will increase, its demand decreases.

Demand Curve

From the demand proportionality we've seen above, we are able to derive the following demand curve :

This graph also indicates the demand curve falling because the price reduces. The downward slope of this curve explains the law of demand. Moreover, its rightward shift with falling prices shows growing demand.

A comparable marketplace demand curve displaying the needs of numerous commodities of the same type will also appear the same. This shows that the demand curve is always downward. The volume to which a curve slopes decreases may vary however its downward direction is inevitable.

Such a downward slope of demand curves from left to right explains the law of demand. This occurs due to the inverse relationship between price and demand.

Reasons for the Downward Slope of Demand Curve

There can be many reasons for the falling nature or downward slope of the demand curve. A number of them are as follows:

Causes of the downward slope of the demand curve --

Law of demand

Substitution effect

Earnings impact

New consumers

Antique consumers

Demand Curve and the Law of Demand

1. Regulation of Demand

The law of demand states that with ever-increasing amounts of the commodity, its demand declines.

As an example, whilst someone is hungry, the first chapati that he eats will provide him with the most pride. As he's going to eat chapatis, his degree of satisfaction will diminish.

For this reason, whilst the amount of goods is greater, the demand for the commodity is less. As a result, the customer isn't always inclined to pay a greater rate for the commodity and its demand will decline.

Also, whilst the rate of the commodity is low its demand increases.

As a result, the demand curve slopes downwards from left to right.

2. Substitution Impact

Let us recognize this with an example. Tea and coffee are replacement goods. If the cost of the beverages of tea rises, consumers do shift to coffee.

This may lower the demand for tea and increase the demand for coffee. As a result, the demand curve for tea will slope downwards.

3. Earnings Effect

The earnings impact refers to the trade in the real income or the buying energy of the purchasers. When the price falls, the shopping energy of the customers’ increases and they buy more goods.

Similarly, while the price rises, the purchasing energy of the consumers’ decreases and they purchase much less quantity of products.

4. New Consumers

Due to the decrease in the prices of a commodity new customers get attracted toward it and buy it. As a result, this will increase the demand for the commodity.

5. Old Consumers

While the price of the products falls the old consumers tend to shop for greater items than common thereby increasing its demand. This leads to the downward slope of the demand curve.

What's the Regulation of Demand?

The demand curve slopes downwards because as we lower the price of x, the demanded starts growing. At a lower price, purchasers have an extra income to spend on buying the same good, so they can buy greater of it. This ends in an inverse relationship between price and demand. This relation, in economics, is called the regulation of demand. It states that (other things being identical), “as price falls, the demand will increase and vice versa.”

Exceptions to the Law of Demand

There are surely cases in which when the price rises, the demand also rises (and vice versa). Accordingly, the regulation of demand does not follow in those examples. Those are termed as exceptions to the law of demand:

When the good is desirable. As the rate rises, the demand has to rise.

When the good is a need. Even supposing the price rises, consumption must upward push as that good is a need.

If the price of two similar goods increases, then it causes greater goods to be consumed at a cutting-edge lower cost of the 2.
