What is Peak load pricing?

Peak Load Pricing
Definition: The Peak Load Pricing is the pricing strategy wherein the high price is charged for the goods and services during times when their demand is at peak. In other words, the high price charged during the high demand period is called as the peak load pricing.

This type of price discrimination is based on the efficiency, i.e. a firm discriminates on the basis of high usage, high-traffic, high demand times and low demand times. The consumer who purchases the commodity during the high demand period has to pay more as compared to the one who buys during low demand periods.

The peak load pricing is widely used in the case of non-storable goods such as electricity, transport, telephone, security services, etc. These are the goods which cannot be stored and hence their production is required to be increased to meet the increased demand. Thus, the marginal cost is also high during the peak periods as the capacity to produce these goods is limited. And, hence, the price is set at its highest level with an aim to shift the demand or at least the consumption of goods and services to attain a balance between demand and supply.

For example, during summers, the electricity consumption is highest during the daytime as several offices and educational institutes are operational during the day time, called as a peak-load time. While the electricity consumption is lowest during the night as all the office establishments and educational institutes are closed by this time, called as off-peak time. Thus, a firm will charge a relatively higher price during the daytime as compared to the price charged at night.

Peak-load pricing is another pricing variation where the operator and government interests coincide. Peak-load pricing is useful when marginal costs vary depending on when the service is used. For example, the telecommunications operator builds his network with the capacity to serve the peak demand, which generally occurs during business hours. As a result, network costs are caused by peak demand and not demand during off-peak hours. To facilitate marginal cost pricing, the operator would maximize profit by charging higher prices during peak hours and lower prices during off-peak hours. The prices at the peak reflect the marginal costs of capacity and the lower-off peak prices reflect only the marginal costs of off-peak usage, which are generally close to zero in telecommunications. Peak-load pricing requires sophisticated measurement of customer usage. This is rarely a problem in telecommunications, but requires advanced metering technologies in energy and water. As a result, the cost of implementing these advanced measurement technologies must be weighed against the welfare gains of metering. This is a situation where the operator and government may disagree. The operator benefits from advanced metering only to the extent that the metering increases profits. The government is also interested in how the metering benefits customers, so the government may have a stronger desire for advanced metering than does the operator.
