Why is price control required?

Price Controls
Governments have been trying to set maximum or minimum prices since ancient times. The Old Testament prohibited interest on loans to fellow Israelites; medieval governments fixed the maximum price of bread; and in recent years, governments in the United States have fixed the price of gasoline, the rent on apartments in New York City, and the wage of unskilled labor, to name a few. At times, governments go beyond fixing specific prices and try to control the general level of prices, as was done in the United States during both world wars and the Korean War, and by the Nixon administration from 1971 to 1973.

The appeal of price controls is understandable. Even though they fail to protect many consumers and hurt others, controls hold out the promise of protecting groups that are particularly hard-pressed to meet price increases. Thus, the prohibition against usury—charging high interest on loans—was intended to protect someone forced to borrow out of desperation; the maximum price for bread was supposed to protect the poor, who depended on bread to survive; and rent controls were supposed to protect those who were renting when the demand for apartments exceeded the supply, and landlords were preparing to “gouge” their tenants.

Despite the frequent use of price controls, however, and despite their appeal, economists are generally opposed to them, except perhaps for very brief periods during emergencies. In a survey published in 1992, 76.3 percent of the economists surveyed agreed with the statement: “A ceiling on rents reduces the quality and quantity of housing available.” A further 16.6 percent agreed with qualifications, and only 6.5 percent disagreed. The results were similar when the economists were asked about general controls: only 8.4 percent agreed with the statement: “Wage-price controls are a useful policy option in the control of inflation.” An additional 17.7 percent agreed with qualifications, but a sizable majority, 73.9 percent, disagreed (Alston et al. 1992, p. 204).

The reason most economists are skeptical about price controls is that they distort the allocation of resources. To paraphrase a remark by Milton Friedman, economists may not know much, but they do know how to produce a shortage or surplus. Price ceilings, which prevent prices from exceeding a certain maximum, cause shortages. Price floors, which prohibit prices below a certain minimum, cause surpluses, at least for a time. Suppose that the supply and demand for wheat flour are balanced at the current price, and that the government then fixes a lower maximum price. The supply of flour will decrease, but the demand for it will increase. The result will be excess demand and empty shelves. Although some consumers will be lucky enough to purchase flour at the lower price, others will be forced to do without.

Because controls prevent the price system from rationing the available supply, some other mechanism must take its place. A queue, once a familiar sight in the controlled economies of Eastern Europe, is one possibility. When the United States set maximum prices for gasoline in 1973 and 1979, dealers sold gas on a first-come-first-served basis, and drivers had to wait in long lines to buy gasoline, receiving in the process a taste of life in the Soviet Union. The true price of gasoline, which included both the cash paid and the time spent waiting in line, was often higher than it would have been if the price had not been controlled. In 1979, for example, the United States fixed the price of gasoline at about $1.00 per gallon. If the market price had been $1.20, a driver who bought ten gallons would apparently have saved $.20 per gallon, or $2.00. But if the driver had to wait in line for thirty minutes to buy gasoline, and if her time was worth $8.00 per hour, the real cost to her was $10.00 for the gas and $4.00 for the time, an overall cost of $1.40 per gallon. Some gasoline, of course, was held for friends, longtime customers, the politically well connected, and those who were willing to pay a little cash on the side.

The incentives to evade controls are ever present, and the forms that evasion can take are limitless. The precise form depends on the nature of the good or service, the organization of the industry, the degree of government enforcement, and so on. One of the simplest forms of evasion is quality deterioration. In the United States during World War II, fat was added to hamburger, candy bars were made smaller and of inferior ingredients, and landlords reduced their maintenance of rent-controlled apartments. The government can attack quality deterioration by issuing specific product standards (hamburger must contain so much lean meat, apartments must be painted once a year, and so on) and by government oversight and enforcement. But this means that the bureaucracy controlling prices tends to get bigger, more intrusive, and more expensive.

Sometimes more subtle forms of evasion arise. One is the tie-in sale. To buy wheat flour at the official price during World War I, consumers were often required to purchase unwanted quantities of rye or potato flour. “Forced up-trading” is another. Consider a manufacturer that produces a lower-quality, lower-priced line sold in large volumes at a small markup, and a higher-priced, higher-quality line sold in small quantities at a high markup. When the government introduces price ceilings and causes a shortage of both lines, the manufacturer may discontinue the lower-priced line, causing the consumer to “trade up” to the higher-priced line. During World War II, the U.S. government made numerous unsuccessful attempts to force clothing manufacturers to continue lower-priced lines.

Not only do producers have an incentive to raise prices, but some consumers also have an incentive to pay them. The result may be payments on the side to distributors (a bribe for the superintendent of a rent-controlled building, for example), or it may be a full-fledged black market in which goods are bought and sold clandestinely. Prices in black markets may be above not only the official price but even the price that would prevail in a free market, because the buyers are unusually desperate and because sellers face penalties if their transactions are detected, and this risk is reflected in the price.

The obvious costs of queuing, evasion, and black markets often lead governments to impose some form of rationing. The simplest is a coupon entitling a consumer to buy a fixed quantity of the controlled good. For example, each motorist might receive a coupon permitting the purchase of one set of new tires. Rationing solves some of the shortage problems created by controls. Producers no longer find it easy to divert supplies to the black market since they must have ration tickets to match their production; distributors no longer have as much incentive to accept bribes or demand tie-in purchases; and consumers have a smaller incentive to pay high prices because they are assured a minimum amount. Rationing, as Forrest Capie and Geoffrey Wood (2002) pointed out, increases the integrity and efficiency of a system of price controls.

Rationing, however, comes at a cost. The government must undertake the difficult job of adjusting rations to reflect fluctuating supplies and demands and the needs of individual consumers. While an equal ration for each consumer makes sense in a few cases—bread in a city under siege is the classic example—most rationing programs must face the problem that consumer needs vary widely. One solution is to tailor the ration to the needs of individuals: people with a long commute to work can be given a larger ration of gasoline. In World War II, community boards in the United States had the power to issue extra rations to particularly needy individuals. The danger of favoritism and corruption in such a scheme, particularly if continued after the spirit of patriotism has begun to erode, is obvious. One way of ameliorating some of the problems created by rationing is to permit a free market in ration tickets. The free exchange of ration tickets has the advantages of providing additional income for consumers who sell their extra tickets and improving the well-being of those who buy. A “white market” in ration tickets, however, does nothing to encourage additional production, an end that can be accomplished by removing price controls. Also, a white market in ration tickets will not necessarily cause the product sold to be moved to the same regions of the country where the tickets are sold. Thus, a white market will not necessarily eliminate regional shortages.

With all of the problems generated by controls, we can well ask why they are ever imposed and why they are sometimes maintained for so long. The answer, in part, is that the public does not always see the links between controls and the problems they create. The elimination of lower-priced lines of merchandise may be interpreted simply as callous disregard for the poor rather than a consequence of controls. But price controls almost always benefit a subset of consumers who may have a particular claim to public sympathy and who, in any case, have a strong interest in lobbying for controls. Minimum-wage laws may create unemployment among the unskilled or drive them into the black market, but minimum wages do raise the income of those poor workers who remain employed in regulated markets. Rent controls make it difficult for young people to find an apartment, but they do hold down the rent for those who already have an apartment when controls are instituted (see rent control).

General price controls—controls on prices of many goods—are often imposed when the public becomes alarmed that inflation is out of control. In the twentieth century, war has frequently been the occasion for general price controls. Here, the case can be made that controls have a positive psychological benefit that outweighs the costs, at least in the short run. Surging inflation may lead to panic buying, strikes, animosity toward racial or ethnic minorities who are perceived as benefiting from inflation, and so on. Price controls may make a positive contribution by calming these fears, particularly if patriotism can be counted on to limit evasion. This was the limited case for controls made by Frank W. Taussig, a member of the Price Fixing Committee in World War I, in his famous essay “Price-Fixing as seen by a Price-Fixer.” A somewhat similar case can be made for removing controls cautiously when suppressed inflation—that is, inflation that the government holds down forcibly by price controls—is significant. Toward the end of World War II, more than fifty leading economists, including friends of the free market such as Frank H. Knight and Henry Simons, wrote to the New York Times (April 9, 1946, p. 23) calling on Congress to continue controls for another year until supplies and demands were more nearly in equilibrium in order to prevent the inflationary spiral they feared would arise if controls were removed suddenly.

However, most inflation, even in wartime, is due to inflationary monetary and fiscal policies rather than to panic buying. To the extent that wartime controls suppress price increases produced by monetary and fiscal policies, controls only postpone the day of reckoning, converting what would have been a steady inflation into a period of slow inflation followed by more rapid inflation. Also, part of the apparent stability of the price indexes under wartime controls is an illusion. All of the problems with price controls—queuing, evasion, black markets, and rationing—raise the real price of goods to consumers, and these effects are only partly taken into account when the price indexes are computed. When controls are removed, the hidden inflation is unveiled.

Inflation is extremely difficult to contain through general controls, in part because the attempt to limit control to a manageable sector of the economy is usually hopeless. John Kenneth Galbraith, in A Theory of Price Control, which was based on his experience as deputy administrator of the Office of Price Administration in World War II, argued that the prices of goods produced by large industrial oligopolists were relatively easy to control. These firms had large numbers of administrators who could be pressed into service—administrators who were willing, moreover, to shift their allegiance from their employers to the government, at least during the war. Galbraith overstated the market power of large firms, most of which were in highly competitive industries. But even if he had been right about these firms’ market power, the problem with limiting controls to a particular sector of the economy is that when demand is surging, it tends to shift from the controlled to the uncontrolled sector, forcing prices in the uncontrolled sector to rise even faster than before. Resources follow prices, and supplies tend to rise in the uncontrolled sector at the expense of supplies in the controlled sector. Thus, a government that begins by controlling prices on selected goods tends to end with across-the-board controls. This is what happened in the United States during World War II. The attempt to confine controls to a limited sector of highly concentrated industrial firms simply did not work.

A second problem with general controls is the trade-off between the need to have a simple program generally perceived as fair and the need for sufficient flexibility to maintain efficiency. Creating an appearance of fairness requires holding most prices constant, but efficiency requires making frequent changes. Adjustments of relative prices, however, subject the bureaucracy administering controls to a barrage of lobbying and complaints of unfairness. This conflict was brought out sharply by the American experience in World War II. At first, relative prices were changed frequently on the advice of economists who maintained that this was necessary to eliminate problems in specific markets. However, mounting complaints that the program was unfair and was not stopping inflation led to President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s famous “hold-the-line” order, issued in April 1943, that froze most prices. Whatever its defects as economic policy, the hold-the-line order was easy to justify to the public.

The best case for imposing general controls in peacetime turns on the possibility that controls can ease the transition from high to low inflation. If a tight monetary policy is introduced after a long period of inflation, the long-run effect will be for prices and wages to rise more slowly. But in the short run, some prices may continue to rise at the older rate. Wages also may continue to rise because of long-term contracts or because workers fail to appreciate the extent of the change in policy and, therefore, hold out for higher wages than they otherwise would. Rising wages and prices may keep output and employment below their potential. Price and wage controls may limit these temporary costs of disinflation by prohibiting wage increases that are out of line with the new trends in demand and prices. From this viewpoint, restrictive monetary policy is the operation that cures inflation, and price and wage controls are the anesthesia that suppresses the pain.

But this best case for price controls is weak. The danger is that the painkiller may be mistaken for the cure. In the eyes of the public, price controls free the monetary authority from responsibility for inflation. As a result, the pressures on the monetary authority to avoid recession may lead to a continuation or even acceleration of excessive growth in the money supply. Something very like this happened in the United States under the controls imposed by President Richard M. Nixon in 1971. Although controls were justified on the grounds that they were being used to “buy time” while more fundamental cures for inflation were put in place, monetary policy continued to be expansionary, perhaps even more so than before.

The study of price controls teaches important lessons about free competitive markets. By examining cases in which controls have prevented the price mechanism from working, we gain a better appreciation of its usual elegance and efficiency. This does not mean that there are no circumstances in which temporary controls may be effective. But a fair reading of economic history shows just how rare those circumstances are.

Price Controls in the Indian Economy

The two crucial questions which arise in any discussion of the role of price controls in the Indian economy are; (a) Is the choice of commodities whose prices are controlled rational and justifiable? and,
(b) Do price controls impede the flow of investment resources into the industries whose products are subject to price control? An attempt is made here to examine from these two angles the existing controls on prices of manufactured goods.
THERE is an impression in some quarters, both in India and particularly in foreign countries, that the Indian economy is studded with a number of price controls. Such an impression is unjustified. This is evident from the fact that out of the numerous non-agricultural products only 17 commodities are at present subject to price controls. The twelve commodities whose prices are controlled statutorily are sugar, kerosene, coal and coke (higher varieties). woollen yarn and articles, worsted weaving and hand knitting yarn, iron and steel (flat products), cotton, fertilisers, cotton yarn and textiles (coarse and fine varieties) cement, ethyl alcohol and molasses. The remaining commodities - paper, motor vehicles, petroleum and petroleum products, matches and bicycles — are subject to non-statutory price control.
The story of price controls on agricultural commodities in India is the same as in the Western countries, such as the USA and the Federal Republic of Germany. There is, however, a basic difference. In the U S A, for instance, the Government follows a price support policy for agricultural products in order to maintain parity between agricultural prices and industrial prices in the interests of farmers. In India, agricultural price policy is designed not only to protect the consumers' interests but also to induce farmers to increase agricultural output This analysis is confined to price controls on the 17 non-agricultural commodities. It does not attempt to cover agricultural price policy which is a challenging topic by itself.
There are two crucial questions which should be considered in discussing the role of price controls in the Indian economy. Firstly, it is necessary to analyse the choice of products within the framework of economic justification for imposing price controls on them. Secondly, one
must examine the impact of the operation of price controls on the flow of investment resources into industries whose products are subject to price controls. This is a very basic question for various reasons. After all price control policy is a short term measure to meet the problems created by the shortage of supply in relation to the demand. But the long run solution is to equate supply to demand by increasing the production capacity of the industry. This is possible only if the operation of price control does not discourage investment in the industry.
Why Price Control ?
The price mechanism in a free enterprise economy brings about an optimum allocation of resources given certain assumptions. These are (a) perfect competition in both the pro. duct and factor markets, (b) perfect divisibility of all resources and pro-ducts, (c) absence of direct interdependence among producers and consumers, i e, absence of any divergence between social benefit and private gain as well as social cost and private cost.
In addition, two points pertaining to the Pareto optimum are worth noting. The general equilibrium theory is after all a static theory and therefore fails to take into account the implications of dynamic forces in a growing economy — for instance, the concept of pecuniary external economies and diseconomies. Secondly, the Pareto theorem does not offer any policy norms for income distribution. On account of these characteristics of the Pareto theorem together with its unrealistic assumptions, the price mechanism left to itself as suggested by the static equilibrium theory in both its general and its partial form, cannot serve the basic objectives of economic policy. Hence, the need for Government
interference with the market mechanism.
In India, price control has been one of the instruments in the armoury of the Government for achieving economic objectives and for implementing the Five Year Plans. Specifically, there are four objectives which price controls on the 17 non-agricultural products are expected to fulfil. These are ;
(a) to protect the interests of the vulnerable sections of the consumers given the income distribution";
(b) to facilitate investment in priority industries which are essential for laying the foundation for rapid economic development of the country;
(c) to prevent monopolistic exploita. tion by a few- firms belonging to a single industry, and
(d) to ensure a reasonable degree of price stability.
(a) The consumption of essential products like sugar, kerosene, coarse varieties of cotton textiles and molas. ses is vital to those sections of the Indian society which are relatively poor. In a growing economy when prices of such products are under pressure, it is natural that these vulnerable sections cannot purchase their day-to-day requirements at marker prices. Just as during war time essential consumer goods are subject to price controls and rationing in the interest of the consumers, their prices are at present controlled in India in the interest of the lower income groups. And the pressure on consumer goods prices is generated by the strains and stresses inherent in the process of accelerating the rate of the growth of the Indian economy,
(b) Economic planning implies investment priorities. Such priorities have to be determined because the market mechanism fails to allocate the scarce resources in a manner that would hasten the pace of economic
growth of India. The failure of the market mechanism, in turn, is due to the divergence between social and privale cost, as well as social and private gains. It is extremely desirable that scarce resources, particularly the basic inputs such as steel, cement and coal are made available for priority investments in adequate quantity, at the proper time and at reasonable prices. This is because the flow of basic1 inputs to the different sectors of the Indian economy is essential for maintaining the time schedule of various key projects. If the time schedule is upset, the problem of phasing the Five Year Plans would become extremely difficult This is particularly so in the case of India because it does not possess the safety valve of imports to supplement the deficiencies in the domestic production of basic inputs. Thus the rationale behind price controls coupled with distribution controls on cement, higher varieties of coal and coke and flat
products of iron and steel industry is to enable the user industries to purchase them at reasonable prices and in adequate quantities.
In the absence of price controls, some of the priority industries requiring cement, steel and coal would find it very difficult to buy them in adequate quantities and at reasonable prices in the free market. It is very likely that cement would be available for luxurious residential construction in the growing urban areas whereas construction of irrigation canals and dams would be starved of cement. Everyone, however, would agree that investment in dams and canals is more beneficial that investment in luxurious construction from the point of view of the society as a whole.
(c) It is true that the number of producing units in a given industry is not a necessary and sufficient condi. tion for considering the industry a monopoly or an oligopoly. However, market conditions tend to be monopolistic
or oligopolistic when the number of enterprises in a given industry is relatively small. It is, therefore, not incorrect to regard paper, motor vehicles, matches, bicycles, iron and steel, fertilisers, and petroleum and petroleum products industries as monopolistic or oligopolistic. This is because the number of units manufacturing paper and paper board were 45 in 1964, those manufacturing motor vehicles were 9, scooters, motor cycles and three-wheelers 9, and bicycles 20. There were only four companies which manufacture petroleum and petroleum products and only 6 producing matches, and two main private sector units in the iron and steel industry.
Given the market structure for the products of each of these industries, it is not unlikely that they might follow a policy of administered pricing. If so, these industries would tend to exploit the consumers of products such as paper, motor vehicles, petroleum
and petroleum products, matches and bicycles. Such a situation would not be consistent with the objective of preventing exploitation of the consumers and also concentration of economic power. The Governments in Western countries, such as the U K and the USA do not allow full free, dom to the management of an oligopolistic industry to adopt an administered pricing policy. The Government in India would likewise be justified in becoming a party to the determination of prices of these commodities.
Theoretically, effective- maximum price of a commodity produced by a monopolist or an oligopolist might lead to increased output and more efficient allocation of resources. If the maximum price is somewhere between the equilibrium price which would be determined in the absence of price control and the point of intersection of marginal revenue and marginal cost itself, a monopolist or an oligopolist would regard the demand curve for his product as perfectly elastic upto a certain limit. The new marginal revenue curve upto a limit (which would also be equal to the average revenue curve) would be lower than the original marginal revenue curve. The producer would determine the equilibrium output by equating his new marginal revenue curve with the marginal cost curve. Hence there would be higher output provided the producer had not already reached the point of production beyond which his marginal cost curve had become perfectly inelastic.
It is plausible that in the Indian conditions, effective maximum prices of products like paper, motor vehicles, iron and steel, matches and bicycles may not have the effect of increasing their output. This is because producers in these industries arc likely to be operating their plants at full capacity in the sense that they would have stretched output to the point beyond which marginal cost would have become inelastic.
(d) Price control policy has also another important objective to fulfil, viz, maintaining a reasonable degree of price stability. If prices of sugar, kerosene, coarse varieties of cotton textiles and molasses which enter into the cost of living of the masses of India are not controlled, it is very likely that trade unions would be under pressure to push up the wage rates. If trade unions were to succeed in raising the wage rates to compensate the working class for rise
in cost of living, industrial development would suffer. In other words, India would experience the familiar cost push inflation which countries like the U K and the USA have faced in the post-war period. Since cost push or for that matter demand pull inflation is not desirable for economic growth of either a developed or an underdeveloped country, the Government of India is justified in resorting to price controls of these essential consumer goods.
Again if steel prices, for instance, are not subject to price controls, the cost of production of a number of industries consuming steel would rise. Just as steel prices in the USA are extremely Important for maintaining stability of the American economy, they are equally important not only for the stability of the Indian economy but also for its growth,
The analysis thus indicates that the choice of commodities subject to price controls can be justified on economic grounds. The policy is consistent with the objectives of maintaining reasonable degree of economic stability, preventing exploitation of vulnerable classes of the society and mitigating the effects of imperfect market structure.
The important question that now remains is whether the price control policy has created conditions for the long run solution of the problem of shortage of certain commodities, In other words, the policy should be scrutinised from the point of view of its impact on the flow of investment resources into the controlled industries in order to raise their capacity consistent with the requirements of other sectors of the economy. One should, therefore, examine the basis on which price of a commodity is fixed by the Government.
Formula for Fixing Prices
The Government fully recognises that the efficiency of an enterprise depends to a great extent on its price policy. It believes that prices charged by an industry should provide sufficient resources to that industry for its expansion. The price policy should also enable an industry to attract new investment for its growth. In other words, the prices fixed by the Government should yield a reasonable margin of profit — reasonable in terms of enabling the industry to build up adequate reserves for expansion and reasonable in terms of attracting new capital by offering a handsome
rate of return to the prospective investors.
It seems that the Government has followed the cost plus principle in fixing prices for the 17 commodities. Such a principle is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for making price control policy adequately flexible for ensuring a reasonable rate of return to the investors in industries subject to price controls. For this purpose, the Government has to estimate the cost of production including replacement of plant and machinery at current or prospective cost. ' It should also determine a rate of return which is consistent with the degree of risk and uncertainty inherent in an industry whose product price is to be fixed, in comparison with the degree of risk and uncertainty in other industries.
Another important aspect of price control policy is to determine relative prices of multiple products manufactured by a single industry, in such a way that the structure of production would be in conformity with the pattern of demand for the multiple pro. ducts over a period of time. This calls for projection of the pattern of demand for industries like iron and steel and petroleum and petroleum products. If the relative prices fixed by the Government fail to reflect the changing pattern of demand in a growing economy, the structure of production could become distorted. Such a development particularly in the case of a basic industry would have very adverse effects on the rate of growth of the economy.2
The formula evolved by the Tariff Commission is by and large followed by the Government, while fixing prices of various products. The formula, generally, provides for 12 per cent before tax return on total 'capital employed'. It may be useful to examine the implications of the formula in terms of the maximum rate of return that it may determine.
Let,
Rc - Po Ro + Pb Rb Po = proportion of owned
capital to total capital
employed. Pb = proportion of long term
borrowed capital to
total capital employed. Ro = rate of return on owned
capital. Rb = rate of interest on long
term borrowed capital.
RC = profits 'before tax as percentage of total capital employed.
Let us assume that Rc = 12 per cent. It the long-term borrowed capital can be raised at 8 per cent rate of interest and if the ratio of owned capital to borrowed capital is 1:1. the formula would yield a ceiling of 16 per cent before tax return on owned capital. With a higher ratio (owned capital to long-term capital) of 1 : 2, the ceiling on the rate ef return (before tax) on owned capital, accord-ing to the formula, would be 20 per cent.
In the case of priority industries, Indian companies in which public are substantially interested and whose ratio of owned capital to long-term borrowed capital is 1:1, would ar present bear an assregate tax incidence of 45 per cent so long as profits before tax on owned capital would not exceed 20 per cent. If, however, such com-panics in the priority industries are entitled to various tax concessions and if the ratio of their owned capital to long-term borrowed capital is 1:2, the tax incidence would be lower than 45 per cent. Thus the ceiling of 20 per cent return on owned capital determined by the formula, would yield a maximum net return (after tax) of more than 10 per cent.
Incidentally, it may be noted that industries subject to price controls except the consumer goods industries are regarded as priority industries emit led to tax concessions including the proposed special development rebate introduced in I he Budge! for 1965-66. Hence, industries producing basic inputs have scope for earning a net rate of return of more than 10 per cent on owned capital.
From the long run point of view, the crucial question is whether investment resources are diverted from controlled industries to non-controlled industries. This is indeed a very difficult question to answer. The reason is that for this purpose, it is necessary to determine the optimum differential rates of return in various industries according to the degree of risk and uncertainty prevailing in the different industries. If the actual differential rate of return in a given industry is below the optimum differential that would bring about equilibrium of investment resources in the economy, one can easily draw the inference that additional capacity in such an industry would not be created.
In the absence of data on the optimum differential rates of return, it may be useful to turn to the profitability ratios estimated by the Reserve Bank of India. The Table shows that in the case of industries whose products are subject to price controls, gross profits as percentage of total capital employed did not exceed 12 per cent except in the case of matches during the three years 1960-61 to 1962-63. Similarly, gross profits as percentage of total capital employed in other industries were not appreciably higher than 12 per cent except in the case of woollen textiles, mineral oils and medicines and pharmaceuticals. Again, profits after-tax as percentage of owned capital in the industries subject to price con. trols varied between 3.5 to 13.4 per cent. The same profitability ratio for other industries except woollen textiles, medicines, pharmaceuticals ranged between 4.4 per cent to 14.7 per cent. The behaviour of dividends as percentage of paid-up capital declared by the controlled as well as non-controlled industries was more or less similar to that of other profitability ratios. Sub-ject to the limitations of these profitability ratios, one may, therefore, infer that there does not exist wide divergence between rates of return in various industries, which may justify investment in the non-controlled industries
at the cost investment in indus-tries subject to price controls.
The analysis indicates that it may not be proper to blame entirely the price control policy for lack of Adequate expansion, if any, in same of the industries whose product prices are fixed by the Government. Even if these industries are capable of raising financial resources, additional capacity may not be created at a desired rate because of bottlenecks in the supply of essential inputs which they require. It is, therefore, necessary to find out in the case of each individual industry whether the difficulties in obtaining the required inputs both indigenous and imported or the price control policy is responsible for any lag in the growth of the industry.
Notes
1 This implies that the controlled prices should be changed whenever cost of production changes. Such a flexibility is evident in the upward revision of controlled prices of some of the products, such coal and steel.
2 This point is very well stressed by the Raj Committee. See Report of Committee on Steel Control, Government of India, October 1963, pp 13.14.
